Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: LIVE155
Speakers: Daniel Rosenwasser, Seth Juarez
Seth Juarez: Welcome back to Microsoft Build. We are here on the live stage, and I'm super excited to be here with Daniel. How are you doing, bud?
Daniel Rosenwasser: Doing all right. How about yourself?
Seth Juarez: Fantastic. So why don't you tell us who you are and what you do? And this is going to be a fun one. Tell us about it.
Daniel Rosenwasser: Oh, it's going to be great. So my name is Daniel Rosenwasser. I'm the Product Manager on the TypeScript team. I've been there for a long time. I started out as a developer, moved into the PM space because I just kept talking, and they were like, "All right, let's move him over here." Yeah. So I've been working on TypeScript. So that is the language, the compiler, the editor experience that you know and love in VS and VS Code. And, also, if you're just doing JavaScript in these editors, we're supporting all of that stuff. It's all powered by the same guts that we've been working on for a long time now.
Seth Juarez: So I remember talking to Anders, I don't know, a year ago or so, about a major change. But before we get to that, I realize, why don't you tell people what TypeScript is? The blurb. It's super cool. I use it all the time.
Daniel Rosenwasser: Yeah. So, basically, many, many years ago, we found that there was just this continuous problem for a lot of developers building out big JavaScript apps. All of us need to have websites. All of us need to have apps that are cross-platform, that are accessible in the browser sometimes. And so as we sort of needed to do scalability and actually create more complex apps, we found that there were a lot of other things that we were sort of missing from our other languages. Like in C Sharp
you know that certain things are just plain not going to work not just from when you compile it but as you're typing it in the editor
you're getting a little red squiggle the same way that in Word you get something that tells you hey
you might have made a mistake here a typo. And so we knew that there was a great opportunity for a great solid safety and developer tooling that we could give people. And also, at the time, we were able to bring people modern JavaScript constructs that were still not really available in every browser and runtime.
And so TypeScript was a way to take JavaScript and add syntax for types and add a type checker and a compiler so that you could bring all the modern features that you know and love today. And the cool part is when I first started on that effort, I mean, I wasn't there from the very beginning, but I was there from early days, and it was like, this is ambitious. This is Microsoft. We're trying to do an open-source project that is in the JS space, the JavaScript space. And a lot of people were like, I don't know. Even before I joined Microsoft, I was very skeptical about that effort.
And then I joined, and then I found out that, really, the team behind all of it is really passionate and had a very good sensibility of working with the community and really trying to have a good sense of developer tooling. And so --
Seth Juarez: It's been nice.
Daniel Rosenwasser: Yeah, it has been nice. So nowadays, I mean, I don't know if you caught this on the GitHub Octoverse this past year, but TypeScript actually became the number one programming language on GitHub.
Seth Juarez: Oh?
Daniel Rosenwasser: Yeah. Beyond JavaScript. And so that is kind of nuts. If you had asked me that back then, I would have just laughed you out of the room completely. But now the thing that's interesting is that TypeScript is now the number one way for people to build JavaScript apps, period. We don't really think of these things as so distinct anymore. It's not like TypeScript versus JavaScript. It's I'm doing JavaScript development, and I'm using TypeScript. And that's just kind of the core experience. So I don't know, I mean --
Seth Juarez: I think it's awesome. I use all the time. And particularly large JavaScript projects, having type safety at the compiler level, or transpilation layer. So about a year ago, there was a major shift from -- because TypeScript was built on TypeScript, kind of TypeScript on Type. But there was a major shift that happened. Tell us about that.
Daniel Rosenwasser: So TypeScript has been built in TypeScript for over 10 years now. It's kind of this food process --
Seth Juarez: It's 10 years already?
Daniel Rosenwasser: Oh, over that. Yeah. People call it dogfooding.
You eat your own dog food, so you know how good or bad your dog food tastes. Or bootstrapping. Basically, by us doing that, that gave us a really solid sense of what the experience is day to day. But the problem with TypeScript being built in TypeScript is it ultimately compiles down to JavaScript. JavaScript has had a miraculous amount of development on all the engines, like in VA and SpiderMonkey and all that. People have made it really fast for the dynamic interpretive language that people kind of knew from 1995. But ultimately, there's an overhead.
There's always going to be a little bit more that your engine needs to do. And so there was this sort of gap between what JavaScript is able to do and what you're able to do natively on your CPU. And JavaScript kind of fundamentally is single threaded. There's ways to do multithreaded JavaScript. But then these threads can't really share the same memory without handing it off fully to each other. And we looked into all sorts of solutions to try to make things faster. But as TypeScript has kind of been delivering on its promise to do complex JavaScript apps that means that there's a scalability gap
not just in terms of scaling on your team but scaling on a big code base. And so people complain, "My build times are slow. I'm waiting for my editor to actually load up all the code I've got on disk." And so, all right, let's cut to the chase now. We actually chose to do a rewrite in the last year and a half or so, taking the existing types of code base and porting it over to Go. And in that port, what we found is a typical sort of speed up that you'll find on many code bases is around 10x, which is pretty mind blowing. And so part of that speed up comes from that native speed, and part of it comes from shared memory parallelism.
So we're able to actually go faster, not just on one core, but across all the cores that you've got. And I've got a little bit of a demo, if we want to dive into that.
Seth Juarez: Yeah, let's do it. So just to recap, effectively, you didn't -- TypeScript isn't Go. Go is being used to do the transpilation, to do the type checking, to do all the other stuff.
Daniel Rosenwasser: Right. Basically, all the code that we had in the TypeScript code base, we took -- we've got different components. We've got a parser. We've got a checker. We've got an emitter to do your code gen. And each of those components was ported over to Go code. But at the end of the day, you're still using this to compile TypeScript code. It's still reading JavaScript. It's reading TypeScript. And it's emitting JavaScript. And it's giving you the same exact errors that you've had in the past.
Seth Juarez: Before we go to demo, because I remember talking to Anders about this. It wasn't you just wrote it and go and wrote new unit tests. You basically took every part piece by piece. Tell us about that process. It was a very methodical approach.
Daniel Rosenwasser: This was also back when agents were a little bit more flaky in the reliability and stuff like that. So a lot of people say why didn't you just -- could you have just vibe ported it over? And so definitely at the time, no. But the cool thing that we did was we used agents to actually write infrastructure to automatically port parts of our code base. So the initial stuff was methodically going through the scanner and the parser. So these two --
Seth Juarez: Artisanally.
Daniel Rosenwasser: Artisanally crafter.
Seth Juarez: Artisanal code.
Daniel Rosenwasser: Yeah. And so once we did that, we kind of had a sense of the data structures and how all of the code would look and how we wanted the code to look. And that allowed us to say, okay, we have a sense of what we want. Can we partially automate this? So we actually had a script that would take a TypeScript file. All of our files are kind of uniformly written in a specific style. And we would say oh, when you're going through the parser, rewrite parts of the parser in so and so way. And that way, whenever you're missing something, you have portions of your component, you say, oh, well, I'm missing that functionality. That's literally a function that you're copying and pasting between the (inaudible) bases. And then you evaluate, is this new function how I want -- is it acting the way I want it to act? Sometimes we got a compiler error, and it's intentional, because it makes you sort of think about how should this act. So you're just sort of ripping pieces of auto-generated code into the new code base. But the cool part about that is that it's all very deterministic.
So if something is not, you can always say, well, this script needs to be amended. I'll actually adjust the output of this thing and I'll make sure that it's giving me something that is more predictable ideal
and more idiomatic Go code for the sort of things that we're writing in the new code base.
Seth Juarez: So did you use the AST to generate Go code?
Daniel Rosenwasser: Yeah. We would use the existing TypeScript APIs. But we would use a really cool tool called TS Morph, which uses our ASTs and everything like that under the hood.
But it's a really nice API. And we would generate Go code out of that. And that really sped up the development process. And we were able to reuse all of our unit tests and our input/output tests, our integration tests. And so over the last year and a half, we've been basically minimizing the differences in all of the tests. So we've basically been able to get, I won't say over 95% of the tests ported over. Some of them don't apply anymore, but that's because there are certain features that we removed as well. But it's kind of incredible how consistent and fast we've been able to move in that process.
I don't think we would have been able to make some of the same strides five years ago, for example. But it's been incredible because we've got a lot of great users internally and externally who are giving us great feedback telling us like hey you missed a spot. But that was months ago.
So it's only gotten more and more and more solid in the last few months.
Seth Juarez: So in general, if someone switches over to the Go underlayer, they're not even going to know, other than, wow, this feels really snappy.
Daniel Rosenwasser: Right. Yeah. So that's the funny thing. It's very interesting to sort of demo these sorts of things, like, hey, I have a compiler. I have a faster compiler. Isn't that cool? And I can show you why there's a little bit more subtlety to that. But yeah, for the most part, most people will not really notice a difference. There is some stuff that we are trying to work on right now which applies to the APIs. So if you're relying on stuff like the Vue.js editing experience or Angular as well, there are certain gaps. You'll still be able to get some benefits from this new compiler architecture. And, in fact, you'll get a fully -- the gaps will close over time, actually pretty soon. We're working with all those dev tool authors. But most projects, I would say, are just ready to actually start adopting this.
Seth Juarez: All right. Now that we've done the preamble, people have confidence, let's take a look at what you got. There you go. You knew exactly what I was going to ask. Let's take a look. What are we looking at here?
Daniel Rosenwasser: Okay. I'm actually editing the VS Code code base right now. If you go to the VS Code repo on GitHub, this is their source code. So I'm going to actually show you what it is to compile their existing code base today. There's a pretty gross command that I've pasted in here, because if you try to compile the VS Code code base with the existing JavaScript compiler or TypeScript compiler, it runs out of memory. So you have to actually modify. You have to pass certain flags to Node.js just to say by the way, I need some more RAM. Or you can use more RAM. It's okay. So what I'll also show you right now is not that, because we're on Unix. Okay. So this is htop. This is sort of a process monitor. What am I doing here? Let's just do this.
Seth Juarez: Look at us going old school. I love it.
Daniel Rosenwasser: Yes. So what you'll notice is that I'm currently on, if you look at Core 15, it's kind of hard to see on this screen. But if I zoom out, Core 15 up here is the only one --
Seth Juarez: Is pegged.
Daniel Rosenwasser: Yeah, it's pegged. Basically, this is sort of the meme of a bunch of people, like construction site, and everyone is just watching one guy dig a hole.
Seth Juarez: Everyone is supervising.
Daniel Rosenwasser: Yeah, looks good to me.
Seth Juarez: And here's an artifact of basically Node, because it's on a spin lock until it has an IO request.
Daniel Rosenwasser: Right. I mean, right now it's just checking, actually.
Seth Juarez: Oh, my gosh.
Daniel Rosenwasser: So it's just checking, and it's only able to use one core at any given time, because it's not able to dispatch between --
Seth Juarez: This is a threat.
Daniel Rosenwasser: -- the files. Right. When you parse, we go one file by one file. And if you say I'm going to import this guy over here, this file over here, then it's like, well, I have to wait for you to finish parsing before I can do anything else. And then it handed it off to Core 28 or something like that.
Seth Juarez: So not efficient.
Daniel Rosenwasser: Not efficient. Took 97 seconds in our opinion, one minute and 38 seconds real time, according to the system. That's a little bit hard to see, so I'll zoom in. Okay. So do we have tsgo? Okay. We don't have tsgo. So tsgo is the binary that we have in place of TSC, the TypeScript compiler, until we're out of preview stage. So if we do npm install @ typescript/native-preview --
Seth Juarez: Look at him, artisanally typing stuff in. What are you, some kind of animal? What's going on here?
Daniel Rosenwasser: Let's do this globally, actually, because. All right. Cool. So now we have tsgo. Great. So what you'll see is 7.0. The next TypeScript compiler is actually going to be Version 7.0. And it's nicknamed tsgo for a lot of people. If we try to do the same command with tsgo, we'll do tsgo, we'll point it to the source directory, extended diagnostics. And then we'll also time it, too And then we'll do this. We'll look back at htop. What you'll see is that everything is in use right now. All of a sudden, all the cores got saturated at the very beginning.
Seth Juarez: Whoa! They're awake.
Daniel Rosenwasser: For a very brief second, you might have seen we went down to four.
And then we really saturated again. So what happened there was we parsed all of the files into VS Code code base. I think it's like a million and a half lines of code.
We checked only across four cores, because checking is not a perfectly parallel problem. And then when we did emit, that was like, all right, throw in all the cores that you've got. And that made it really fast.
So you didn't see it in the background, but that was nine seconds, or just 10 seconds. We went from a minute and a half to 10 seconds, non-incremental build, full build. And what I also want to show you as well is that is just the command line experience. So for a lot of people, that's like, well, that's cool. You only have a command line compiler.
What else have you got? Well, we have a native preview extension. If you literally go to the marketplace and you type in "Native Preview." TypeScript's native preview is the first thing that comes up.
And so it says, hey, this workspace -- in VS Code, they're already type checking with a new thing. Right?
Seth Juarez: So as you're doing that, why don't you tell who's using this already?
Daniel Rosenwasser: VS Code, Sentry, Slack, Notion, Figma. We've actually been working with a lot of big companies internally -- teams internally and companies externally, because they know that the quality bar has already been -- it's there for them. And they're using it in production, and they've got much faster turnaround times for their CI. We worked with one team at Microsoft that told us that we were saving them 400 CI hours a month. And so maybe in cost, that's like, hey, that's pretty good. But in terms of developer costs --
Seth Juarez: Yes, this is time.
Daniel Rosenwasser: -- that's great. In terms of I'm waiting for an agent to do a thing for me, that's really sweet also.
Seth Juarez: All right. So we got about a minute left. What do you want to show us in the last minute?
Daniel Rosenwasser: I want to show you that basically -- let's disable the native preview. If I open up a TS file, you will sometimes see this little spinner here, that initializing TS config, all that. This is the existing TypeScript experience. And basically, what's happening is it's doing that thing where it's going file by file and not able to load it all. I want you to say goodbye to that.
Seth Juarez: Let's say goodbye.
Daniel Rosenwasser: Let's say goodbye. So this thing, it's automatically enabled when you install. As soon as I open this, I can restart the language server over and over again, and it's just speedy. Uh-oh. You didn't see that. Anyways, it's fast.
Seth Juarez: Hey, we're still working on code. It's okay.
Daniel Rosenwasser: I mean, there are some rough edges. Of course, during the demo, it had to happen that way. But basically, as soon as you open this thing up, I mean, it's still running at this point.
Seth Juarez: All right. This is amazing. All I know is that this is really cool. I'm excited to use it. Thank you so much for spending some time with me.
Daniel Rosenwasser: Thanks so much. Yeah. Go try it.
Seth Juarez: We'll be back after this.
Daniel Rosenwasser: It's available to you all now.
[ Music ]
END
