Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: BRK233
Speakers: Chip Huyen
Chip Huyen: Hello, everyone. Hey there. So, I am Chip.
Thank you so much for coming to my talk. My career has been mostly with building AI systems, trying to make AI useful in the real world. So, I started with NVIDIA; and then I worked on Snorkel AI, which is a data company. And then, I started another AI infrastructure startup, which I sold. And since then, I'm doing a new company, which is in robotics. Anyone here is into robotics?
One person. So, yeah. So this is a bunch of robots that I work with.
Like this one, I'm trying to fit the ring on the robot hands, which is weird because they don't quite have the same width as human fingers. But, yeah. So today the talk is about software defensibility because that's the type questions that have been trying to think about in the last few years because there are two things that I thought of myself as being good at.
One is writing, and the other is coding. And I think those are the top two things that AI could easily automate nowadays. So, it makes me feel like, okay.
So, what should I do that I can reasonably defend in the age of AI? So, how many people here consider yourself a software engineer? Whoa. A lot of you. How many of you are worried about AI automating your job?
One person. Okay. Few more people. I think this is the kind of thing you don't say out loud. It's like, yes.
Keep it a secret. Okay. So, one thing I keep hearing people telling me is that the cost of building software is approaching zero. So, I keep hearing people saying, okay. It's extremely cheap right now to generate code, right? You can just get AI and it can write you an app, a feature, build a website extremely fast.
So, I keep hearing companies who, in the past, maybe they could only create maybe like 10, 20 variations for A/B testing. Now they could generate like 1.000 variations for A/B testing, because it costs extremely cheap. So, it made me think about, okay. If the cost of building software is approaching zero, does that mean that the value of building software is also approaching zero, right?
If the cost is zero, then the value is zero. So, it makes me think about, so it's like, it made me realize, it's like, okay. What should it be building, right? What is the point of building anything nowadays if there's no value associated with it? So, a few months ago I had launched a side project.
It's a weekend project. I like it. It's fun. It got some traction, 300,000 views within a weekend. And then within a day somebody emailed me saying that
"I love what you did." So I asked Claude Code to do exactly that; and here's the link to the website exactly what you just built. So, I felt very ambivalent about it, right.
I was like, on the one hand, I'm flattered. Thank you. But, on the other hand, what the heck, man?
It's just here's your token, and I copy and paste it. So, it makes me realize, it's like any software that exists today can easily be replicated, right? If you can ask AI to Airtable, it can build it. If you ask it to do Asana, it can build it.
And I see there's a lot of this coming. I'm actually building this side project. It's called kill, kill by gpt.com where we can vote on which product is going to be killed by AI first.
I'm launching it next week, hopefully. And you guys can use Claude Code to replicate it. But, yeah.
So, I'm just curious. Yeah. So, it made me feel like more excitement, because now I can build anything that I want. But, at the same time, anyone can build anything that I want. And, of course, not everything is the same, right? People talking about, okay. Not everything can be easily buildable, because you cannot just build Google in a weekend, right?
But, at the same time, I see that -- are you familiar with METR, like M-E-T-R? So, they just study the progress of AI automations. And they do a benchmark. Okay. Let's take on the tasks that usually take, let's say, an hour. How often that AI can reliably complete the task, right? So, it benchmarks on the length of tasks that AI can complete about 50 percent of the time. And you can see this. Okay.
In the beginning it starts very little, like a few seconds of the task. But now we can reliably complete tasks that take like 16 hours. So
it's a very long horizon extremely complicated task right
because I feel like for a lot of engineers I don't think people can just sit down for 16 hours and code something extremely complex. So, yeah. So, things have been getting very complex, so maybe AI cannot build Google nowadays, given the trajectory. So, this is log scale, by the way.
But if you do linear scale, it will look like very much like an exponential. So, things like AI can, at some point, get there. So, I think it's like the "Ghibli moment of software." So, did anyone use OpenAI to generate Ghibli picture style of yourself? So in the past I feel like there's a trend of everyone using image generation to generate a style Ghibli and then I was thinking that there's no way Ghibli agrees with this.
There's no way. But, also, as a point, we think of like a style is something like, if you can describe a style, it's a shorthand for the AI to know what to do. And the artists were very upset, right, because they spent the whole career developing the style, and we could just do it. And I think it's similar with software. Anything that exists, just make it easier for people to shorthand and build it, right.
Maybe if they want to do something like Asana. It'd take me a lot harder to describe. Okay.
Here's the specs. Here's the functionality. Here's the workflow. But, if it already exists, I can say, okay, let's just do it. You know what it is, right? So, by the act of you putting out the software, you make it easier for the competitor to do exactly what he wants. So, the question with AI is no longer how to build. Now, if you know what you want to do, it's very easy. The question is, is like what you build; and then, once you build it, how do you defend it? So, I'm curious. What do you think would be the moat for your product?
Anyone here is doing a startup? A few more. So, I'm curious what do you think would be the moat for your software startup? Huh? Proprietary data. So, who here thinks of data as a moat?
A few people. So, you think that, if you have a lot of proprietary data, competitors cannot compete with you. Okay. What else?
What else would you consider like a moat for a company? Huh? Trust, like branding. Trust, branding. It's another very interesting question.
Who else? What else? Customer service.
The human layer. So, when you say customer service, it's like AI agent as customer service? I see. Interesting.
I feel like more and more I veer toward just not going through human service. I feel like they can get away with it. I would probably like to try something automated. But it's interesting. So
the question of trust I think it's like people have realized it's like
trust is not sufficient because in the past people were a lot more loyal to your product. But with AI, because the steps change, the improvement is so significant, so you can see people switch models very quickly, right? When ChatGPT first came out, everyone thought, okay. There's no way something can compete with ChatGPT, right? And then Saturday, right, Claude Anthropic came out and said, okay, now I can do it. And then DeepSeek came out, and everyone, a lot would jump to it.
Then DeepSeek turned out to not work quite well; will jump to Qwen. So, I think a lot of the product we have seen that customer loyalty is hard to compete with improvement, like product improvement. But I think I definitely agree with you, just like, building trust is never going to be a pain. On the question of data so data I used to think that like
proprietary data is the most right because you have a lot of data then we're going to compete with you. But then I realized, given how many companies, how much money companies are spending on acquiring data, then data is no longer a moat. Money is a moat, right?
If you have money, you can just buy it. Have you seen a lot of AI frontier labs buying companies just to get the data? Have you seen that? So if you see
look at the frontier labs or a list of their acquiring companies some of them acquire companies like two or three companies a week because the reason is that acquire companies so that they can get data from that company. So
maybe the competitors do not have the data but maybe a frontier lab can acquire the competitors' data and then build something that works quite well for the use case. And it's quite interesting because, given how fast people were able to build a model, a new launch, a new model, to compete with existing models. It turns out that acquiring data is not the hard part anymore.
And, if it has anything, it's more like a commodity. So, let's say that you have a QuickBooks, right? And you say, QuickBooks will never sell data to OpenAI. But OpenAI can just go to my scale AI search, Micron, and say, Okay. Now, create a software that looks exactly like QuickBooks.
Hire like 10,000 accountants that do all the workflow you need as if you were using QuickBooks, and then use that data to train the model. So people can do that pretty quickly and that's why the oldest data labeling companies have revenues of like a billion dollars because they create a lot of data extremely
extremely fast. Another thing people told me about is distributions, right, especially for enterprise. Let's say they have spent like months and months trying to get the software into the customers. And they work with, I don't know, Oracle and like stuff; I know it's very much embedded into the ecosystem.
It shouldn't be really hard for people to move away from it. I think it's, like, just still a lot of validity in it but also want to ask about, okay. How about for consumer products, right? And some things that, like, do not require heavy integrations. And a lot was like, oh, I really do not know, right, because the consumer product, like this and that, is, like, a pretty much easy issue to replicate. And also having a distribution as a moat also makes a few a bit uneasy, because the entire moat strategy depends on people's annoyance, right? Something that makes it extremely hard to use, so that people cannot get off your platform. And also another interesting model is that I have a friend who used to be a partner with a very big firm, like PV firm. And he also tried to sell to a lot of manufacturers, right.
And if you go through compare old school project, old school approach, you have to go reach out to all these manufacturers, and, okay, try to sell to them. And what he did was that, okay. He just bought a software company that already has like 10,000 factories as a customer. It was like, okay. These software companies, they're not AI companies, it's actually a lot cheaper.
If you have AI money, you can go and buy these companies; and that's why you can own the distributions. So, distribution, in a way, can be acquired with more money. Another I thought about is expertise. So, people were like, okay. But I know the domain the best, right?
I have years and years of iterations and make it the best. But expertise is interesting because expertise, for it to be useful, you have to encode it somewhere, right? You don't want to be a service model when you can just use exchange service for hourly money, right, talk to people or not.
So, you want to just scale it, so that means that you encode that. And now, expertise becomes software. And all the workflows, if you spend years and years designing, can be just copied; and people can just use that as a workflow. So I think exactly one thing that I realized is just like
what part is momentum so the only way to spend ahead of customers like your competitors is just to move faster than them. And I think it makes a lot of pressure for a lot of companies, because now, you want to build product.
You're committed to a never-ending treadmill of just doing faster and faster than the competitors, which is for a lot of people it's great. People love it. But it just creates a lot of pressure on the part of how to stay with the competitors.
How do you feel so far? Is this too bleak? So, here's a question of what to build. I think it's a lot of form. I do think it's like a lot of value in building, because building, one thing is, I do spend a lot of time. Right now, I have both Claude Code and Codex running, because I feel like it's just like building. And building things, I feel like it makes me a better problem solver, right? It's because, when you're building, you don't build products that exist in a vacuum, right? You build something to address some annoyances that you have. So, building just, like, helps me understand the problems I want to solve more and have the experience of, okay.
Here's a problem; here's a solution I think would work. Let's build it and launch it. And I put it in front of users, and I see what they say about it. But if you want to build it as a company
as a startup then you need to think about not just like today but how it's going to work two years from now on because under the case I actually invested in this company.
And they did great for the first three years. My first three years, I grew from my zero ARRs and a 10 million ARR. And now they just don't know, okay. Now we have 10 million ARR, but then they cannot get to 100 million ARR. And in a lot of VC world, it's got stuck, right?
You're not going to be big enough to go IPO. But then, what do you do next? So, yeah. So, anyway, it's very easy to keep on building, CLE momentum.
And then don't know, if you don't have a strategy of going big, it's hard to raise money. So one thing is I do have this belief that no matter how good AI is there will always be problems to solve because I think it's like no matter how good AI is
I would never stop being angry at people on the internet. And I would never stop being angry at like, united customer service, right? There's a lot of problems that it's just like, AI will not solve. And I do think it's like, as AI becomes better, it expands the surface areas, right. As AI allow us to build more use cases, as I expand, it might not be the same problems that we had before; but I introduce new problems. And I want to cover a few categories of problems, of things that have emerged with AI. So, before I go into that, I think a major problem is a long-tail problem.
It's a long-tail distribution. So, there are problems everyone faces, right? Everyone wants to write better emails. A lot of people want to write better code. A lot of people want to help with small little things like, okay. Fix my essay. Do my homework. So, they're like a category of very, very big problems that I do believe that a lot of AI frontier labs will try to get the models to do well on, right. Now, let's look at them. Okay.
Here are the problems that face maybe 99 percent as a population, versus the problems that face maybe, like, 1 percent of the population. Then AI frontier lab will probably focus on the ones of like 99 percent a population has. So, that's one reason why a lot of this AI lab still focuses on a few standard use cases, and a lot of them still focus on English. For many, many languages, for example, Arabic, AI actually doesn't quite work well. Doesn't work quite well.
So, I have a friend who is Iranian. And she told me this. She's a professor at CMU, so she does a lot of work with AI.
And she tells a story, because she speaks Farsi, is that the language, Farsi, right? Sorry. I feel very stupid right now.
Yeah, Farsi. And she has an issue of her friends would ask her to explain a sentence, like an idiom in Farsi. And she explains a sentence that, oh, that means like that.
And that friend was like, No. You're lying, because apparently ChatGPT gives a different answer to that different answer. And so, friends somehow trust ChatGPT more.
Even my friend's like, "No, no. I am correct." But just because ChatGPT doesn't do very well in Farsi language. So, yeah. So they work with some, a lot of the voice chatbot. And another problem with voice chatbot is that you have to respond very fast, right. Like a human
human to human interactions so latency is like you want it to be under like 800 milliseconds for it to be like good reasonable natural conversations. But, for voice chatbot, it has to go through three steps. So, first step it should be able to translate from audio into text, right? And then, you send the text to an LM to get back to response. And then you send the response to what I call text-to-speech to synthesize the voice to send it back to users. So, a challenge we have was that this voice chat work really well for English, because the speed of synthesizing English is pretty fast.
But, for Arabic or Russian, it's extremely slow. So, it's like it's really, really hard to create natural voice chatbots for different languages. So, yeah. So I think I see for a lot of long-tail problems, I do see the AI labs as not quite doing it.
And it doesn't mean that they're not doing it like two years from now on. But I can see that if you can pick a problem that is I think of them as big enough to be profitable but not big enough that AI frontier labs wouldn't want to take the launch that kind of thing. Okay. So, here's some of the long-tail problems I could find, I thought was interesting. One is human preferences.
Are you here familiar with RLHF? Have you heard of the term reinforcement learning by human preference? You heard of the term. So, yeah. So in the early days of LM in the early day of GPT-4 and as early day of these models
RLHF is one of the most I think most popular terms that people want to understand. So, the way the model trained, they trained the model is that they want the AI to go to generate responses that humans prefer, right? So, it wouldn't give a prompt, and it gave two responses side by side. And then the human would pick.
Okay; this is the one that I like more. And then you would use that to train the model, to nudge it toward sharing more better responses. So a challenge with that is that it's trying to encode human preference into one equation so it assumes that there's some like universal preference right
like everyone somehow prefers the same thing. So when I was going through the Anthropic RLHF datasets they made online I realized a lot of what people consider the winning responses
actually I do not prefer the winning response. I actually prefer the losing responses, just like somehow the note is like, smart is not better. So, human preferences are extremely hard, and it requires you understand users very well. So, going back to the voice chatbot, right, so humans actually have a very different preference of how fast the other person responds. So, I'm from Vietnam. So, in Vietnam, people actually prefer the other person to give them time before a response.
So, I have a niece who is 10 years old, and I have my godmother, who's a 70 year-old American woman. So, I tried to put them on a call, and it was the worst experience. So, the thing, so when my godmother, she tried to be friendly, right. So, when my niece took time to respond, my godmother was like, okay.
She is shy. She doesn't know how to talk, and she didn't want the awkward silence. So, she kept, if my niece wait a little bit long and didn't say anything, my godmother kept on asking questions, right? And then, after that, my niece told me, it's like, wow.
She didn't give me any time to respond at all. So, it turns out, there's actually a well-known study about it. It's about, in the West, people actually prefer conversation respond rates to be very fast, maybe 18 milliseconds. If you finish talking you expect me to respond very very fast whereas in some cultures like Vietnam
after you finish talking you give the person maybe like 200 milliseconds so that the other person can make sure the other person has finished and formulates a response. So, all of these nuances you need to go to understand the customers to build a product that works quite well. So, I guess part of the expertise as part of the moat, it's more like user understanding, understanding who you're building for. Another thing is, like, the human-AI interactions. And, since we're at Microsoft Build, I want to talk about a lot of you are, like, software engineers. How many of you are using AI to write code right now?
Almost all of you. Yeah. How many of you are using it via the Terminal?
Some of you. Right. How many of you use it via ID?
How many use both? Okay. Well, most of you use both. So, when I was looking, it's like Terminal is a very interesting product. So, Terminal, I think of it as a more legacy product. Do you think that Terminal is easy to use or hard to use? Who thinks terminals are easy to use? One person, right.
Few people. So, Terminal, when I started using Terminal for writing code, it got pretty annoying, right? It's very hard to move the cursor around. You kind of just throw an image in there. If you see a user-built website, it's like, okay. This is, like, a horrible interface. I want AI to see that this is terrible, but I cannot easily drop an image in there. And it's made me think, why are terminals so hard to use? And it made me think of, okay. Terminals are actually very powerful. Terminals are like a control plane for the computer, right?
It's very easy to do stupid things there. You can remove RF. They can remove the whole operating system, and you could be, like, in trouble. So, terminals, in a way, was designed to be hard-to-use on purpose, so that people who don't know what they are doing don't do something stupid by accident, right. So, IDE, on the other hand, just makes it a lot easier to use. But then I thought about it. It's like, there's not really a reason why they need to be in a separate product, right?
One of them is, like, ease of use, and the other makes it, like, harder to control. So, I think, what if we have something just like as a hybrid. And I think it's like a lot of those Codex desktops, or like Claude Code desktop, or like a different desktop, design should be a mixture of it, right. It has an ease of use of like IDE, but then you also allow each access of file systems, the ways that a terminal can, so that it may give you that more power. And another thing is about it
people have quickly realized that which was so good we quickly realize this is like have you ever walked around with your computer open because of Claude Code or Codex is running on the computer? Yeah.
I think I walk around the airport. And, when I see somebody walking around open, okay; that person has something running. So, there's no reason why you need to do that, right, because I even think about all the work is being done on the cloud.
There's no reason why you need to keep the computer open to run it. But, then, so there's a lot of tools to make it easy for you to access, to make your things run without the computer. So, somebody likes to open Claude early in the day. A lot of people bought the MacBook Mini so the idea is that you have a server that hosts your agent so that you can just leave it running all the time; so you don't need to use the computer. But after that it creates a whole challenge of like, okay. You need to create a sandbox.
You need to copy to recreate the environment. So now it has to be on the cloud so you can access from a different device and there are some people who create mobile apps so you can control the Claude Code or Codex from the mobile phone. Actually, one of my fun projects was like, I can actually control my Claude Code from my Telegram bot. So, it could send me messages. Okay. Now it's done; they ask me yes, no questions, they can, okay. Do it.
Do it. So, I think all of that human-AI interaction is quite interesting. Another challenge, another example with GitHub, so, I imagine a lot of you probably use GitHub for code review, collaborations, right? And one thing I noticed with code review is that people don't review code the old way anymore. So
I worked with a team recently and the most senior person told me that he still reviews on the code line by line right
which is shocking to me because it sounds so painful nowadays. I don't read code line by line anymore, right. This is too painful. But he said, oh, he did it because he wants to be able to give feedback to junior engineers so that they can learn. Okay.
This is not good or not bad. And then it went to junior engineers. And, okay.
Do you read his reviews? And they were like, no. And the reason he's told me they told me that because the feedback is not actionable because the senior engineer will say "Okay
do not write this if-else function like this. Write it like that." But then those junior engineers are not the people who write the code, right? It can tell AI, "Okay, don't write this thing." But it's not going to be applicable for the future. So, what the junior engineers want feedback on is how to write the instructions for the code. And that's something I feel like GitHub is not quite designed for right now, right, because I think, with the new AI coding, the artifact is no longer the code.
Like GitHub was designed around code as a main artifact, right? You have the codebase. People protect the codebase. So, the code is the main artifact. But nowadays with AI coding, the main artifact action is the instructions.
How do you like the specs? I think several coding spec-driven development is like how do you if you have a good spec you can give it to AI; it can generate code maybe even better than what you currently have. So, yeah. So, I think it's a lot of work thinking about designing, okay.
What would be the workflow for us to work with AI so that it can be more meaningful, because a lot of the workflows that we have nowadays are legacy. So, I guess it's like also part of, like, human collaborations. It's like, how do we get different people to work on a codebase effectively with AI in the loop as well. And another category of tools, of problems I find exciting, is the human-AI environment interactions. So to make AI work better in production
right one way to go is to make AI better and do things better another way to go is also to make the world an easy environment for AI to operate in. So, one thing with AI coding is that I have noticed that AI works a lot better with new codebases. Right. Now, you have a new codebase; AI can just do things. It also works a lot better with modular codebase. Okay. It's like, okay. Just build these new functions.
It's a lot easier than trying to fix the old codebase. So there's a whole new category of consulting firms that go and retrofit the big existing codebase to make them more friendly to AI coding
so make it more modular with different separate and massive monorepos into smaller repos and things like that. And another example is also API. So, in the past, a lot of the tools and apps were built for humans. And what humans want are all the GUI, right, like the graphic user interface because, humans, we are very visual. We want to be able to, if we go to Salesforce, we want to open the website; we go and see, and here's a button we want to click.
And we want the color to look nice. We want things to represent it. But AI actually doesn't do very well on the visual. Right.
Now if you ask AI to do Salesforce you really want to code a bunch of API functions so we see that a lot of companies try to move a lot more of their design into API design instead of the GUI design. And I think it's very clear to see the usage of, first of all, let's say you have a tool like Salesforce. You can see there's a usage on the Salesforce, how much of that was used by human and how much is used by AI.
You can see the distribution changes a lot over time. Another thing, more physical world. So, I work a lot with robotics nowadays. And a lot of the arguments people have against general purpose robots is
like why do we need a robot that can do everything and work everywhere instead of just change my house or change the road to be better easier for robots
right? So, one example is a food delivery robot. Do you know these little food delivery robots that move around?
I think in the South you see them a lot. They're very cute. They're very tiny. They show up like this, so that you can put the food inside, and it takes it to your home, and you open it. And it's adorable. So, I was talking to the team. I was asking, so what is a weird challenge you had with this robot?
And they were like, oh. The biggest challenge was the robot couldn't cross the street. So, when the robot would go in the street and the light turned green, and a lot of streetlights need you to press a button so that the light can turn green. But the robots do not have arms.
It's very tiny, so it cannot press a button to cross the street. So, somebody has an interesting innovation of, if the robots can go up to a pedestrian and ask the person, "Hey. Can you press the button for me?" There was some video online and the pedestrian was like, "What is happening, is this robot asking me to do manual labor for it? I should be asking you to do things, not the other way around." But, yeah.
So, he told me it's like actually some cities, they have this kind of thing. It's like they call it a streetlight API so that all this robotics company can actually access the city streetlight and they can tell it when the light's going to turn green. And, instead of pressing the button for the light to turn green, you can actually call the API to turn the light green. So, that's one example of getting the world to be more AI- friendly long-term.
I think this is the whole feel of it. I think that we are still very early, because we still don't quite know what use cases are going to be possible and how we can make the world better for it. Another thing is, it's pretty important for the robot to operate in the real world. It's kind of like a revisability.
So, recently Claude Code actually deleted my database. So, I asked it to do an app, and I want you deploy on a port. It's like a Docker Postgres port. And I have another app already using that port. So, Claude was like, I saw that the port is taken.
Let me clear it so that we could deploy this app; and then it completely deleted the other Postgres database. Wow. Smart. So, I was mighty amused. But was not frustrated because I have a backup, right? But it could happen, right? So, for a lot of things that happens in on your computer, there's a way for you to revert what happens.
Git is great for it; if you submit a PR or, like, make a commit you don't like, or it reverses the old commit. But, for a lot of use cases, you don't have that luxury. So, let's say you ask an AI agent to submit a form, right. After you submit the form, maybe the form, the data now lives in somebody else's server.
You cannot undo it unless you ask the server, the form owner, to delete it for you. So, you don't have that luxury. You cannot just transfer money to another bank account and then ask a bank account to transfer it back. They might. But, if they are like the scammers, if we want, right? So, there are a lot of things that, as we give AI more power, more tools, it's just the risk is just higher. So we need to design the whole system around how to make it very very hard for AI not to make mistakes because mistakes can be very costly and not reversible for many many use cases. And especially working robotics, it's important, more important than ever because, if a robot step on a child, I don't think we can just revert that, right.
The child's really hurt. So, actually one of the robotic companies I work with, because they want to use cases, we say that they get asked for a lot is elderly care, right? I'm not sure any one of you have to deal with elderly care. It's extremely expensive.
Some people pay $20,000 a month to take care of an elderly parent. So, the need for it is very high. But elderly care has a thing. It's scary, right, because a robot is heavy. And robots has very low battery life. So, for example, have you seen the Unitree G1 robot?
It's like yay high, right? So, it's like 80 pounds. So, it's metal, right. Imagine that falling on you.
That does not feel good. And you can do a lot of things to help with it, but one failure is quite dumb. This battery just dies. So, let's imagine that the robot is doing some walking, right, and that the battery just dies. So, the robot, mid-action, can just like flop over. So, it's quite challenging. So, we're doing things. Oh. Do you know about the one-wheel accident? Do you know the one wheel?
The one just has one wheel, and they can go and ride around. It looks very dangerous but very cool. So, they have one failure mode, just like the Gotham suit a lot.
It's just like, if you're on the wheel and the battery died, you would just fly over there, because the wheel is stuck there. So, that could happen with robots. Let's say it's like the robots do a lot of actions, and the battery dies. It would just have no control over itself. So, there are a lot of toolings, work to make it safer.
Maybe detect, once a battery is maybe low, then you don't attempt any complicated actions. Or self-charging is a very important feature so that we develop, so that even though it's robotic, okay. If we're going to run out of battery, let's move back to the base. And also, there are the rules that we can do around safety.
How much time do we have left? Yeah. Yeah. So, I think there's a lot of problems that we can build for AI, with AI. I'm actually pretty excited because one thing I realized is, with AI, I get to build more things, because now I do not have to do a lot of boring stuff. I can just focus on thinking about, okay. What kind of new things, new problems I want to solve. And a lot of this boring stuff, to be fair, I actually do not like manually writing code because, in college, one thing I really hated was vectorizations, right? I had to do something, it's, okay. You have to make it super fast, or writing if-else functions.
I never found that very, very exciting. But now, with AI, upload a play code. Now, with AI, you can do that a lot faster. So we talk about software defensibility for the product but another question that I also think a lot about is
how to make myself more defensible in terms of AI right because how do I make sure that I can learn the skills that AI won't automate.
So, in the early days of ChatGPT, one thing that I did spend time on -- and I would love to learn more from people how they do it, what I call like a career audit. So, for the whole week, I actually went through and wrote down everything that I did. And I tried to think of, okay. Can this thing be automated by AI, right?
If it can, is there someone already doing it? Or, if cannot be AI, or if it does not exist yet, then maybe I can build it. So, they give me a lot of ideas and so give me like a better understanding of so, build code is a term of AI exposure. What percentage of your job is exposed to AI? And, the higher the percentage, the higher chance of the job being automated. So, yeah. I'm going to be curious to see how people approach that. So I think, just to bring it home, I think about any software that exists can be replicated.
And so, I spent the last two years in my last company to think about, okay. If that's the case, maybe should I go beyond software? So, I think of AI agents as, an AI agent is about performing actions, right? In the earliest, in the simplest form of action, it's just like token, like generates the next token, which is the early days of ChatGPT, LM, right? It's just keep on generating one token after another.
Should I turn to an essay, an email, question answering. And then the next category, next level of actions are digital actions, right. Now, the agent can do fancy things or can read files. It can write into files, which is important for coding. It can code different APIs. From GitHub API, it can call, it can call image generation API.
It can call whatever, the banking or internal API, external API. It can do search. Search is a very important digital action.
I think this is the next tier. I believe it's physical actions. So, for example, now, instead of -- imagine, right, imagine that you have an agent that's running some code, maybe they open Claude or something on the terminal. And then suddenly it says, okay. For this to do complete this task, maybe I need to build small things. It can run out and buy it. Or it can do, okay. I want to do this task, like hosting an event. Maybe you can think, okay.
For hosting event, I can create a guest list. I can invite a guest. But I also need to go out and buy some plates. If you can send, get some robot to do these physical actions, that could be super cool. So, I do think there's a next another layer of action in the real world, like you do physical actions.
And I do think of just like physical AI agents actually do not look that different from the AI agent that we know today because an agent is anything that can interact with the environment right
take feedback from the environment and perform actions on it. So, a coding agent, the environment here is like the computer, right. And the action you can do is like refi, wifi, edit. So, it can perform actions. It can receive. It can perform actions in the environment by making changes to the file.
It can get feedback from the environment first, where it can try to run the file, try to see the compile to see if it passes a test. So, that's how anization work; and it's the same thing with a physical agent, but now the environment is physical, instead of just purely, purely digital. And the action here is more physical motions, like walk, pick up things, placing things, pushing, pulling. And AI, we have seen that it has worked quite well with reasonings, right. With AI, the initial AI agent, we can see, being given a task, it can reason through step-by-step how to accomplish the task, right? Okay. If you want to do a business app first, I need to create a database.
I need to build as well. I need to write a script, and things like that. And I have seen it; AI can do the same thing for a lot of the tasks in the real world. Let's say if you ask it, oh, do laundry, you can first think, okay. First, I need to collect all the clothes.
Second, I need to take them to the washing machines. I can do a lot of random things. So, I think its reasoning part is pretty good. I do think I have pretty strong convictions that AI is pretty good at reasoning. AI needs to give it a physical understanding because I need to for digital AI
a lot of the product a lot of environments are very well-described with documentations. Not everything has good documentations, but ideally, a lot of APIs. You know what endpoints you can call, right. It knows what parameters. It expects, it knows, okay.
Here's the error code. You know what that means. But, for a physical wall, we don't quite have that nice description of the wall. There's no documentation about how to handle an egg, right? There's no one to say, Okay.
If you put this much force into the egg, it will break. Or like, if you put the leg this way, you're going to fall. So, that's not good description of the physical environment. So, that's the part that we need to teach AI. We humans, we learn how to operate in the real world to retry an error, right?
For a try, it takes like a long time, maybe a year or so just to learn just to walk, like learning to control the muscles, the joints. We don't have that information encoded. And that's why there's a lot of effort going to what is called a world modeling like trying to model the world
so that we can teach AI how to understand and operate in it. But, yeah. So, I'm very excited about it. So, actually, one of the companies that I work with have a demo tomorrow for the robots. They have this dog robot. Unfortunately, they kind of spare a humanoid. Humanoids are really cool to watch. But, yeah. Unfortunately. I think the dogs are also very cute. Yeah. If you want to come, come for it. And, if you want to talk about robots, get in touch.
I'm trying to write more about software defensibility and AI for robotics in general. Yeah. Thank you so much, everyone.
[ Applause ]
END
