Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: DEMSP394
Good afternoon everyone. Welcome to Microsoft Build. Welcome to cross-platform modern.net with Uno Platform at enterprise scale with AI assisted workflows. We are your hosts for the next 25 minutes. I am Sam Basu, Developer Advocate over at Uno Platform and with me I have.
Colin Whitlatch I'm the CTO of Kahua and we're here we're long time partners with ITO and we're extremely excited about what you're here to see today because it's just an evolution of what you guys have built. Yeah. So we are doing this together strategically as Uno platform.
We are the makers of the platform and Colin and Kahu are our biggest customers. They're pushing the platform and the tools to get what they need out of their enterprise realities. So we are here to share how we see the evolution of developer tooling across agentic workflows as we go into the future, some big announcements to you know make.
So let's let's get into it. So first thing is, as we look at how we build software, we have some broad buckets, right? We could do the traditional code centric where we are in our IDs all day and we are manually writing code and testing things. Maybe you want some more visual stuff. So if you have, you know, drag and drop tools, maybe you can iterate on your UI a little bit quicker. We got hot reload that can sync things back. But you know AI is dramatically changing how we build software and the fundamentals still matter as you can see will bring a lot of context so that your AI agents and you fall into a pit of success
right? So you know, it's a full scale, it's a spectrum. And hopefully you'll see that as we go from left to right, your tooling, your developer productivity get much, much better with agentic workflows. Yep. And one thing to add is we're going to show you a lot.
It's going to be fast with 25 minutes here. One important thing, we love AI Mart company that has over 100 developers. We've gone from writing code by hand.
Six months ago we actually were still all traditional development. We now zero code written by by humans. It's all AI driven. We're orchestrators. That's the big thing for everyone to learn here. But one thing that I want everybody to focus on here as we go forward is we love the design tools that are out there. Things like, you know, there's Copilot, there's claw design, love Figma.
What you're going to see here, it is the full stack. So we're not just showing you something where it's just a bit of thing like you got to go Polish it off later. You're going to be some real live running code. Yeah, let's get into it. So more on that we see the spectrum.
I think most of you are in the same boat. We have done a lot of surveys where majority of us are adopting AI. We are doing so cautiously. You know, you might still have some people who are hesitant, but more and more of us are going to the AI forward, the innovators. Maybe you're doing multi agent orchestration, you're using MCP tools, you're using skills. So the more we cater to the, you know, AI forward people, the better it is for the whole stack. But the idea here is no matter where you are in the spectrum, we should have tooling ready for you to be productive right now. No matter how good your AI tools, the fundamentals matter.
Otherwise it's vaporware, right? So this is our fundamental it's a foundational open source stack that's suitable platform, been around for a long, long time. It gives you a cross-platform way to build.net apps. So from a single shared code base, I get to build an app that runs on iOS, Android, web through web assembly, browsers, Windows, Mac OS, Linux, all the things. And I have lots and lots of tools to be productive, but we want to take that a little bit more. This is Uno Platform Studio. This is a collection of AI and design tools meant to augment your productivity. So the first thing is hot design.
Maybe you want a runtime visual designer. So as your app is running, we give you a pause button. You have a nice surface area to tweak on your app UI with hot reload. We sync it back to your ID with your code. Maybe you're using Figma or Pencil, any of those design tools we can bring over your design, you know, nice pipeline into actual functional code for your for your apps. And if you're using AI, we want AI to have context, right?
Context is everything. So our MCP tools bring the context of, you know, the grounding that you need for docs, so latest docs. And then for those of you who build web apps, you might be familiar with Playwright. So this is essentially playwrightfor.net apps, right?
So AI has eyes and hands. So we can have the agents look at your app, interact with it, click on things, you know, type in text. So you have a full way to validate what the UI, what the AI is building. So that's where we stand today and we are, you know, that's a full vertical integrated stack.
And I think Colin, you folks use this a lot. So start wherever you are, any OS, any ID, you get started with the MCP tools, super easy to get set up. And as you develop, you have all the tools to be productive all the way to CICD and deployment pipelines. And you folks, you know do enterprise apps with this?
Yes, we do. And we, you know, we have an enterprise platform and there's a whole lot of apps under that umbrella. And I will say you're exactly right. There are a lot of entry points into this and you can start you know you can be AI first in terms of getting things things going but you can still do your traditional approaches.
You can do database first. You can just go out and just do a little rapid prototyping, any type of model waterfall if you'd like. It's all you can start anywhere here. And I was saying, you know, this, this is somewhat in a way linear, maybe vertical and horizontal.
It's a very big circle for us. There's any aspect you can jump into and get started with it. Yeah. So it is a rich stack as we stand today, but let's look ahead at the future. Our teams have been super busy for the last, you know, several months and we are super, super excited to present to you Uno Platform Studio 3.0. This is the evolution of everything that we have talked about into the agentic future with skills with plugins with all the AI and design tools that you need to be really really productive. So there are a lot of things in here. Let's get into it. First is a specialized agent that knows exactly how to build Uno Platform apps really, really well. And it's, you know, backed by skills because agents, they need skills to be, you know, falling into a bit of success.
We do that like 60 plus skills. We have MCP tools, so the agents can be looking at docs, they can validate the UI that you're building. So your agentic loops work very efficiently.
Now, cross-platform net, it's not easy because you have to depend on those SDKS, iOS, Android, Windows and Mac. So there is some setup, but we are here taking away all of the barrier to entry. There is literally nothing to install because we are launching Uno Platform Studio app. This is an app that runs seamlessly on desktop, web and mobile. So you could literally go to your browser and this is not vibe coding.
We are going to spinupafull.net app for you in the browser. We are going to visually see the app being built. You can tweak your app UI.
Once you're happy, you export and you drop down into your ID or CLI. So really, you know, easy to get started and you know, jumping in for a full cross platform.net experience, right. So that's that's it in another in a nutshell. Enough talk. Let's.
Straight. So I think it's up for a second. One quick thing is, you know, it's with, you know, platform and you really build it once. It runs everywhere, desktop, web and mobile. Been that way for quite some time, quite powerful.
Love it because we only write these things once. There is no having to go and build. It's on an entirely new platform. I have to duplicate code.
What you're about to see here is literally kind of the inverse here. We're running and buildingafull.net app with just straight from the browser. All right, so I'm looking at platform dot Uno here. That's our website. As you can see, we have a text box right up front to say, tell us what you want to build, right? So compared to other tools like lovable
bold or anything else this is spinning up a full on net cross-platform app right there in your browser with an agent that's very comfortable. So this is where it starts out. It's just a prompt. I'm going to copy over and just type in a text here. Let's just build a, you know, weather app. And again, it's AI, so it's non deterministic. We'll let it spin for a little bit. It's, you know, getting into planning mode.
Let's block my calls. I am in no disturb mode anyways, so while it's building, we're going to switch over to some apps that I have built already. So there's a gallery you can start with a prompt or you can just start with one of these apps that are built.
This one here is a coffee app and you can see what it does out of the gate is I can see what my app looks like in light mode and dark mode, right? I can see what my app is going to look like on on a mobile form factor, slightly bigger tablet form factor and so on so I can really visualize what my app is doing. I still have my agent here at all times to tweak app UI. I can ask you to make some changes on the left hand side.
Here are a couple of interesting things. If I go into design mode now, I'm actually looking at hot design, which is where I can tweak and iterate on app UI. I can select anything in here and I can see the actual visual tree where my app UI is being rendered. I have all of the UI that I can drag and drop and I can change up all of the properties. It's, you know, all working live in the browser for you, right? So again, just to look at what this might look like, I can go down to previews, which are individual elements of your app kind of disconnected. But in design mode, you can see how they're looking at across responsive breakpoints, you know, across different states.
What do they look like with or without data binding. There are some system design, you know, UI as well. But if you go back to the app, you know, you can try out your app fully interactive right in the browser. Here's another app. This is actually a CRM app, again, done from a simple prompt. Here I can go into interactive mode and you can see as I'm you know looking around my app it shows me all the things as if my app is you know
working and it is a real app fully loaded up through web assembly in the browser. Here's some live charts, data visualization, here's some, you know, custom mapping solutions. So full on enterprise apps.
Once I'm ready once I have spun this you know spun this enough I can hit export and at that point it just drops you down into either GitHub or local and then you can go from there
right? So what we are trying to do here is really enable how quickly you can start up here. Here is kind of where we see the future. I don't have the time to show you this live but you can have multiple sessions where I might be on my web
he might be on a mobile device and I can still make UI tweaks and push it through. Hot reload to all of the sessions that are looking at the same thing and each one is loading up the app live in real time. So that's how we get started.
This one is still spinning. It's actually building the app. We'll come back to it, but let's just say you are ready with this right and you want to drop into your actual dev environment. So let's take a look at what that looks like. So here I am in Visual Studio Code right here is where again the tooling shines the same tools that we use from the web.
What you can see here are a couple of MCP servers that are wired up because it knows that it's an Uno platform app. There is a new plugin. The plugin brings in 60 plus skills on exactly how the agent can build Uno platform apps and again, just more modular guidance and instructions.
So the agent does the right thing. This one here is like a chef's app and this is Visual Studio Code, so it recognizes all the places where my app can run. I'm going to quickly run this here on my desktop.
So let's do a quick run here. It's going to do a build. Net 10 is our desktop runtime and it's going to do a build here and outcomes the desktop application, right? So this is my app and it's running here. I'm going to skip past a couple of things here to get to the main screen. So it's a recipes app, you know, it's busy, it's got quite a few views, view models, it's data-driven. What you what you see here is up here, we do notice hot reload and hot design wired up. So again, we are giving you the same tools. Now it's in desktop, you have the same things in mobile here. I can step down and I have the same interface.
I can interactively you know work on my app or I can go into design mode and at which point I can really zoom in and look at individual items and I can you know zoom in further here. Let's go into this particular collection view. I can go all the way down to the template view.
I can go all the way down to the individual data items that are bound to my template. And you can see this is live data. So we are working with something very live in production, right?
And at any point I can click in and I'm out of the hot design mode. One more thing to show is if I go in here in interactive mode, in enterprise, apps are often complicated. You have a wizard, you have, you know, steps you have to go through here I can just tap and I can use the app as if I'm using this on desktop or mobile. Let's just go into this mode here. Let's say I want to change up this thing.
My CTO calls, he wants to make a small change, right? So here I can go back into design mode and I can actually highlight that. Let's go further in.
That's the chart and what you can see here is these are some brushes that we are painting it with. Let's change this up to a different color. As you can see, it immediately repaints because this is hot design. It realizes that I've made a change. So it shows me the change right here. And if I go back to my IDE, I happen to know that was the recipe pages detail page, and that's the chart control.
You can see the protein brush color has changed, right? So whatever I do in my design surface comes right back to my code, right? So that's a nice experience. Now let me close this out. One more thing I want to show you here. Let's go into my GitHub Copilot or any agent that you want.
I can do cloud code here as well. What's nice here is if I open this up, you can see that this is a Uno platform project. So it wires up these things for me. So my agents are always grounded in the best practices of how to initialize and what are the ways to build, you know, Uno platform app.
It can do documentation, search and fetch. So it always does the right thing. And then these are my app interactivity controls. So I can do click, I can do screenshot, I can do this is how AI keeps working in a loop until it gets it right. So This is why these tools are so important. So as an example here, I can I never have to leave my ID if I'm in a depth flow. Here we are asking like this is a reactive pattern like Mvux, but just, you know, this is C# and XAML. So I can do MVVM or I can do MV UX. So when I ask like tell me about this
this is where you can see it actually goes in and tries to you know do documentation searches and fetches and gives me a summary of exactly what to expect. So both you and the AI agent is always grounded in the docs.
Makes sense. Now a little bit more here, let's go a little bit more interactive. I'm going to close this out entirely, right? And we are back into the mode where we are doing terminal command line everything, right?
It's headless and it's super, super fast. So this is the same app that I'm looking at now. I'm going to pull up GitHub Copilot. This is the exact same chat experience that you have inside of Visual Studio or VS Code. I'm going to make it maybe a little bit bigger. So this is GitHub Copilot.
I can resume here in my VS Code or Visual Studio or Writer. So wherever it works here, if I go into MCPS, you'll notice that it's using the same exact MCP tools that I showed you from my ID. So again here as well, the agent is grounded in docs and it has those app interactivity tools. If I now go in and say give me all the skills that you have, there are 60 plus skills in here that are just released as of today. This is a big push for us getting into UNA platform Studio 3.0. If you want to do navigation if you want to do material toolkit or anything theming wise we have lots and lots of skills here that again helps the agent do the right thing.
So let's do one quick, you know, test here. What if I say, let's launch the app on desktop here you're going to see the AI. This is the AI.
It's non deterministic. So it's going to try to figure out oh thisisa.net project it's going to read the CS project and try to figure out how to launch this because it I did not give it anything. So it's working away over slow Wi-Fi. So while it's doing that, let me see if our this thing finished. So this the weather app that I started out here, it's fully done, took about four minutes. We are you know
making this shorter and shorter but this is a fully immersive weather app done completely in your browser and I can hit export and drop it down into Visual Studio right? And again, this app from the get go is it's light mode and dark mode. It's interactive. So I can see what it looks like across bigger or smaller form factors. Let's go look at the biggest form factor here.
Look, I mean, it looks nice, right? So all of this done with just a single prompt, right? And here as well, I can drop into design, I can change up things if I don't like something.
I can drop into previews and look at how things are looking at an individual UI element level. OK, so we have 8 minutes left in here, this one here. It's getting to work here. GitHub Copilot is starting to figure it out.
It's gotten the runtime and now it's invoking app start, which is our way of, you know, an MCP tool. So it launches the app, right? So same exact app that I saw from my ID.
Now it's in here and it's done programmatically. So let's get past a few things here. Again, we are back to the screen. So notice how little I'm giving the agent. So the agent takes screenshot after screenshot trying to make sure it's doing the right thing. So if I say let's click on avocado toast, right, just a UI element, I'm not giving it anything. So it has to figure out what exactly is the user wanting to do? Is it a clickable thing?
Is it a button? Is it, is it an item in a feed view, right? It will do all of it. It's actually going to go through the visual tree of figuring out what the app UI looks like and then it, you know, actually clicks on the thing. So think of this in terms of your testing scenarios, your UI testing, your integration testing. You can automate all of this with the right MCP tools, right? So again, it's trying to figure out all the things it's doing the searches and trying to figure out what exactly did I mean. So we'll give it another second here. We have 7 minutes. Colin, do you?
Want to add some. I'm just going to add one thing to point out is again, it's powered by MCP, so you can call it with your own MCP servers, you can call externally. And also, you know, this is using GPT 5 mini, so you can pick which model you like.
It's not particularly any certain 1. Is that like it's the same thing we all do out here? I think the term now is token maxing, which I think with the cost certainly going up, you don't want to do that. It doesn't need a whole lot to get started. And one thing you move rapidly that I want to point out, you see hot design and hot reload on there. I will tell you this.
For those who have teenagers, you've probably realized that the worst technical crime you could commit is taking away their Internet. And then for developers, it's taking away their hot design and hot reload. But you have it here.
Every time you make a change anywhere across the spectrum, whether it's in the console GUI, it's going to be reflected immediately. Yeah. So it's actually figured out and it's, you know, doing a pointer click and eventually it'll click. So for the sake of time, let's let's let's go back to where we started, right? So just a quick recap of all the things we showed you.
Is this still working? There you go. So Uno platform 3 dot O has some key building blocks in it. First up is a specialized agent that has skills that has MCP tools at its disposal. So AI does the right thing.
We are shipping previews so you get to build and you know
preview and validate UI components in isolation across responsive boundaries across data context States and themes. We have snippets. I didn't get to show you that that's a building block for your app UI. So you can quickly iterate on UI.
You can drag and drop and customize. And then we are shipping skills and plugins that you can use from GitHub Copilot, codecs, cloud code, any agent that you want, right? So a lot of things built into one, but the idea here is you can start anywhere. We are, you know, taking it with the various to entry.
Kahua has had a lot of success. So you go. Yes, absolutely. You know run short on time already
but I will say you you know for our platform itself we build this very large just really ecosystem of things where you can come and build with our own canvas creator.
Come see us over the other building. By the way, you'll hear at the end here definitely show you a whole lot more. But to a couple things I want to just touch on here is everything you saw that runs. You can build what we build like we you guys power all of our rendering
all of our display and it is really run once or you build the ones that runs everywhere and a couple things that are on here on this particular one next slide. Yes, what we've been getting into is you'll see Lidar up there. One of my favorite things to do it's, it's not only is it just a cool trick to show demos, but it's actually extremely powerful because it shows what can be done.
You can start with these apps that we build but you're literally from the web and say I want to build out a component literally transition to Visual Studio Code and use our own components. And you can instantly start using iPhone 16 or iPhone Pros and also the iPad Pros and actually take 3D mesh modeling out there.
It's very cool and we use it internally for one of our applications to do inspections like building inspections. You can actually scan rooms and look for safety violations and the like. And another thing we also are doing now 360 photo capture that's we use it because we're in the construction space for a significant amount of our business.
And that one is across the board. There's a 30-40 year projects that are out there. So the owners of that want to be able to actually see things from the beginning through construction walk around and do things such stuff that we power and use with what you've just seen today.
We're not going to talk too much about SKIA today. However, I will say a lot of exciting things on that front, even though it's been out for about 20 years, that is powering everything you see here. A ton of visuals all brought to you by the new platform. All right, so I think what we are trying to say here is humans and AI need to work in a loop. We're all in this together.
We don't want to hold up either one, right? So the human needs to go. Maybe you start with the prompt, maybe you have a detailed spec file, but you need to hand it off to AI to say go do your thing. And at that point, AI needs to have all the right tools to be able to successfully build what you're asking and also verify that verification loop is super important. This is where AI can, you know, gather what it needs to build, plan, generate the code, and then verified.
That's where the MCPS and the previews come in. It's going to go on in a loop until it thinks it's gotten it right. And you can see all of this coming live into your environment through hot reload. So keep the browser open. You're going to see the agent, you know, fill in stuff as it gets things done and then you get to see how it's looking. If you need to tweak, go into hot design, tweak a little bit and then let it fly again, right? So it's a loop where neither of us want to be held back.
Just, you know, fly as quickly as we have all possible and then you move on to the next thing. AI builds the rest of your app, so human and AI working together. So back to where we started about building software, right? I think hopefully you can see that we are all over in the spectrum together. No one company or one developer does exclusively one thing. I'm in code a lot, but I'm also using agents a lot, right?
So it's a mix. So here with AI and design tools hopefully what you can see is no matter where you are on the spectrum you have one text stack that has tooling for you to make you productive and comfortable using a combination of all of these tools. And that's what you folks are using at Queja. Yep, 1000% because we're always looking for ways to reduce the overhead or really just with those Bootstrap and getting started. Now you just go to a web page to get started, but it also the deliverables in the day.
By the way, what you get from this is still the same artifacts you just mentioned a second ago. It's you're you're you're building the applications, but you're really still building XAML, still building C# not doing anything different. So all your, you know, the foundations of computer science, they're still exactly the same. It's just we've removed a lot. You know AI is a huge you know
way to make that happen but it's really the tooling you provided and those things that you've talked about like the MCP servers being able to instantly get to things and now do away with trying to have some other interface that you want to do to control the UI. But again, that's what we use it for because it greatly simplifies what we do. We still have all the human loop. It's very big thing for it's a big thing for for everyone, especially for us. Everything needs to be perfect, needs to work the same way. So we still get that, you know, we didn't show any integrations with GitHub, but that is there. But again, as you get the chance to look at things, you know, either approve or decline, reject, pull request, still can do that every day, OK. But again, that is what we're using it for. So this just makes it easier for us to build software. Yeah, so the fundamentals matter, you know, more than it ever has.
It always has, but AI increases our speed. But the context about how you build and verify what you're building absolutely matters. So that's where we are at with Luna Platform, Luna Platform Studio. We are really running out of time here, but hopefully what you see here is a no friction way to get started with crossplatform.net.
With Luna Platform, start in the web, start on the desktop, start on the mobile phone. We can you know, iteratively work on design together in multiple, you know, stacks. So try things out. That's all we are asking. Come and see us. We are up in across another pavilion at a booth all day for two days. So come and talk to us. We'd love to show you more, but most importantly, try things out. Yep, awesome. I will say if anybody is a fan of old classic arcade games, come see us at the booth. We'll show you how. Hawaiian themed arcade games. Alright, so thank you folks for spending your time with us.
Thank you so much.
END
