Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: LIVE172
Speakers: Aditya Ramnathkar, Beth Pan, Martin Vliem, Nikola Metulev
Aditya Ramnathkar: Hello, everyone. I hope you're having a great time at Microsoft Build. This is Aditya Ramnathkar, a Product Marketing Manager, and today, I'm joined by Beth Pan and Nikola Metulev, who are Principal Software Engineers. We are all a part of the Windows Platform Team. In the Keynote this morning, you saw how we are making Windows the best OS for developers. We have optimized the Windows 11 experience to be developer first and distraction free. We are shipping a ton of developer goodness this week core utils native Linux containers with WSL
one-command environment set up with developer configurations agent augmented coding with Windows development skills and Intelligent Terminal and lastly next-generation hardware purpose built for local AI and sustainable workloads. All of these are designed to make you build and ship faster on Windows. Let's take a dig into each of these. Beth has been talking to developers, getting their feedback, on what is the experience to get started on Windows?
I would love to hear from her.
Beth Pan: We've talked to a lot of developers in the past couple years. We've heard a lot of your feedback. This is why we're doing these things. One of the main pain points from our developer audience has always been why is does my machine need a lot of updates and set up? How do I get to the clean state where there's no distractions that week? I can have everything that I need, and just be ready to go, and I can be productive? So as Aditya said, if you're a developer and you come into Windows, we're going to offer you a way to set up your machine to remove all the distractions that you've been asking us to remove and then installing everything that might be useful for you. Tell me, what are you guys' favorite developer configurations or apps.
Aditya Ramnathkar: I love PowerToys. I use it every day.
Beth Pan: Of course.
Nikola Metulev: I just use all the tools. Whenever I need them, I want them to be available, so Git, Python, Node, I use all of them.
Beth Pan: All of them. You're going to get all of them, so Python, Node, MEM, and PowerToys. We have a lot of these apps that are going to be installed through this winget configuration file that we're going to publish, and you can see on my screen here it is a GitHub repo that will be public. Then our developer friends, if you want to fork this, configure it however your way, it'll be flexible.
Aditya Ramnathkar: Is there an option to add any other tools?
Beth Pan: Of course, that's the whole point of winget configuration. Any other questions?
Nikola Metulev: So I can take this file now, and I can just run it through winget, and I can install all the tools that we recommend for developers they might need? So it installs winget. What else does it install?
Beth Pan: It is kind of like a -- how do you call it -- an opinionated way that we think what's important for developers. For example, we don't need you to turn on Developer Mode anymore. You don't have to turn on Developer Mode anymore, Dark Mode configuration, things like Hidden Files, File Explorer, some of the configurations there. There's a full list of things that you can see. I can go back if we want to see the Read Me and see the list of applications that's going to be here.
Aditya Ramnathkar: So I don't need to go to Settings anymore and do that one by one?
Beth Pan: Nope.
Aditya Ramnathkar: I can just run a winget configure?
Beth Pan: Correct.
Aditya Ramnathkar: Awesome.
Nikola Metulev: My understanding is that this is, by default, going to be on some of our new devices we announced today, and this is for developers that might want to set up their existing device with all the new tooling and existing tooling?
Beth Pan: That's a great call-out. If you're coming into Windows, to our shiny, new box, this is just going to be set up for you as a developer. Compatibility is something that we treat very seriously on -- or with -- English is hard. Then you can use this winget configuration by yourself.
Aditya Ramnathkar: Awesome, and today, it is generally available, so try it out now. What next, Beth?
Beth Pan: Since we're talking about setting up developer devices, let's say that I have a machine that I set up today. What do I do? I feel like, as a developer, I would go through Terminal to see what's going on there. So today, we're making it available for people to use all these cool Linux-style commands, core utilities, in Terminal. Remember this thing that you've been asking for? Here, again, you asked, we listened. Now you can do a grep within Terminal.
Nikola Metulev: Finally.
[ Laughter ]
Beth Pan: For example, there's a very simple demo that I can just check my netstat status, and something else that I find very interesting is let's say that you want to do some sort of PowerShell, and then I grab something after it. This is an example of merging these two kinds of system together.
Nikola Metulev: Right. So now, if you're copying some code from, let's say, stack overflow or you getting some scripts from GitHub that might have been written for Unix or Mac or Linux, they will work if they're using all these cool utilities because they will also be available on Windows, and you can make it available, so you don't have to go and translate it into PowerShell.
Beth Pan: Exactly. Any other questions, class?
Aditya Ramnathkar: That's great.
Beth Pan: I think we're going to move on to, since we're talking about Linux Unix commands, let's talk about WSL as well.
Aditya Ramnathkar: Sure. So as we all know, containers are a core part of modern development workflows, and to make that experience seamless on Windows today we are introducing WSL containers, a built-in way to create, run, and interact with containers directly on windows. Whether you're working on local development, AI ML workflows, for even containerized testing, Linux containers just work natively on Windows out of the box. As a part of WSL Containers, we are shipping WSLC, which is a binary that you can use to create, run, and interact with containers directly without having to install any third-party tools or require additional tooling efforts. This all ships with the standard WSL update, so you don't have to do any other configurations apart from just updating to the latest version.
Beth Pan: Wow, awesome.
Aditya Ramnathkar: It is as simple to use as just listing your existing containers. You can see, "wslc container ls." It's easy. It shows me if I have one container running. I can go into that by attaching it to the container, and then I'm going into my Linux shell. I can just do all my Linux workloads. When I am done, I can come out of the shell and just detach it and then quickly see the status again or work, as needed, depending on my workflows.
Nikola Metulev: This is feedback we've been receiving from developers for a very long time, of being able to just natively run containers inside of Windows. The thing that really excites me here that you mentioned is also there. We also support this as an API, which enables usage of these containers inside of applications, which now means that I can have a native application that has native UI. It's running winui or WPF or whatever it is, but it could also have a Linux container as part of it.
Aditya Ramnathkar: Yep.
Nikola Metulev: You can mix this Linux code that you might be using across platform, but it's not running natively inside of your Windows machine next to your native code for Windows, which just opens up all these possibilities for -- it brings this incredible experience.
Aditya Ramnathkar: Yep, and with that, we're also allowing some new controls for enterprises to manage these Linux containers, so that they have visibility and observability to all the amazing work that the developers are doing in their enterprises.
Beth Pan: We've talked about setting up your machine. We went to Terminal and talked about core utilities, and we talked about WSL. We're kind of naturally transitioning to building apps on Windows, and now, building apps for Windows. Nikola, do you have a --
Nikola Metulev: Right so as part of the work that we're doing here and it's something we announced today at the Keynote is we're making it really easy for developers to build Windows applications with AI tools so either using GitHub Copilot or using Claude Code. For example, here I have GitHub Copilot open on my machine, and some of the things that we announced is a new set of agents and skills for winui development or Windows development in general.
For example, here I have installed a plugin called "winui." When you I so if I list all my plugins installed here, you'll see we have this new winui plugin right there. That's installed. This comes with several skills and agents. You can see here we have all these winui skills that exist as part of this that do things like, hey, packaging or code review or design, that bring all that back together. The interesting thing, this is this is not just about markdown right? Anybody can just create a markdown file and call it a skill. As part of the work that we're doing here, we're creating set of tools that agents can use to make it really easy for them to develop Windows applications end-to-end. Through this process, we were able to save over 70% of tokens that we can measure.
That would save a lot of cost when using these AI tools to build Windows applications.
Beth Pan: There used to be a lot of steps around how you're actually writing your code. Before, it was templates, initialization, is that what you're doing now? Then all of the packaging and identity, great, show us.
Nikola Metulev: Exactly.
Aditya Ramnathkar: This agent will take care of that for me?
Nikola Metulev: Right. So before, it wasn't that easy to do the other thing. You'd have to use Visual Studio for a lot of these different things. An agent wasn't able to go and use the Terminal to be able to run a package applications or add identity to our running application. What we've done here, we've added a new CLI called the WinApp CLI.
We announced earlier this year. You can just install it through winget, with just winget install -- WinApp, and you'll be able to do a lot of these different commands as part of that. You can do things like packaging directly from just a folder.
You can package it as an MSIX, or if you want to run an application directly with identity, you can do that quickly. For example, I have a Rust application here. This is just a Rust console application that I've created here and I can just simply "winapp run" the application here and it will run this Rust-based console application and it will really give it package identity so you can use those APIs like a lot of the notification APIs.
You can use a lot of the AI APIs that we have in there directly from here, no Visual Studio required.
Beth Pan: I don't have to learn all the nitty-gritty of the whole Microsoft system if Rust developer.
Nikola Metulev: Exactly. You continue developing with the framework that you're already using.
Beth Pan: But it's extensible.
Nikola Metulev: Exactly. We can extend it with existing APIs really quickly without having to use a lot of the other tools.
Beth Pan: I love the name, by the way, winui --
Nikola Metulev: Thank you. We also added some other features to our skills to be able to make it easier for them to build Windows applications. For example, we now have new dotnet new templates for winui. An agent can create a new winui application, as well as users, and be able to get started quickly with the best practices in mind, so you don't have to guess on how to build an application. Through the integration with WinApp, we can now also run these applications directly from the terminal. Now you can run a fully packaged application directly from the Terminal winui application in this case.
Aditya Ramnathkar: So I no longer need to open VS Code at all?
Nikola Metulev: You can. You don't have to. It's up to you, but you can do everything here. The whole idea is that, now, an agent can fully build an application from creating it through debugging issues. We have tools here for figuring out what the stack traces for when something went wrong. We have tools for figuring out what code you should use, what controls you should use. We connect the agents to samples so they can know what the best practices are. One of my favorite things here that we do, also, we have a utility for interacting with Windows applications. If you use the WinApp UI tooling, for example, you can inspect running applications. In this case, I have Notepad that's running here on the side, and you can see here, I can see all the buttons and everything that's part of that application, and I can even from the terminal, I can invoke that from here.
Beth Pan: It's got the visual tree, and --
Nikola Metulev: Exactly right. It can take screenshots, so as an agent, it knows when something is functionally working, so it can, on its own, fix issues. It can catch those types of issues.
Beth Pan: Iteration.
Nikola Metulev: That's right.
Aditya Ramnathkar: That sounds really exciting. How can I get started?
Nikola Metulev: The best way to get started is just to go on aka.ms/winuiskills, and you're able to download our skills or you can download the WinApp CLI on its own. There's one more thing I want to show you here that we announced today, which is the Intelligent Terminal. The Intelligent Terminal is this fork of the Windows Terminal that we all know and love that has some experimental features of integrating agents directly in it.
It's a different -- I have them side-by-side here. You can see here we have two different terminals running, and you can see this one has this little, cute icon on the bottom. For example, let's say I'm here and I run a command that errors out. In this case, I probably forgot how to type something or mistyped it. You'll see here that this terminal now can actually analyze when the error happened, and it can allow me to say, okay, we know how to fix this. You probably just meant to add the force attribute there, or I could open up directly into the attached included agent view, as well, and I can interact, and I can ask if you do things. I can just say, "Fix it for me," and it will just go and magically -- it has context of all the running commands that I've ran all across all my tabs. It comes with Copilot already built in, but I could connect it to Claude if I wanted to here, other agents as well, and I can experiment. Experimental, but we would love people to give us feedback on this.
Beth Pan: I assume it's going to ask me for permission to do these things, right?
Nikola Metulev: Of course, it's all permission based. You have to be approved to access all your commands. You have be approved for it to actually run commands for you. You can't just do it, but again, it's experimental. You have to install it side-by-side and try it out and give us feedback.
Aditya Ramnathkar: What if I don't use GitHub Copilot? Can I add other agents as well?
Nikola Metulev: Right, exactly, so you can bring in any agent that you have as part of it. It uses the same protocol that all these agents use, and it can tie it into here. You can just go to Settings and set it all up.
Aditya Ramnathkar: I don't have to remember all the cherry-pick things anymore?
Nikola Metulev: Right. That's one of my biggest things I go through online searching is forget issues whenever something happens and my state is in the wrong whatever. I have to always go, how do I reset back without losing any of my changes? What is the command I have to use? I never remember. I can just ask it in line without losing context, and it knows what I'm doing. It'll just do it.
Aditya Ramnathkar: That's going to be such a great productivity help. I can't wait to get started on that.
Nikola Metulev: Exactly.
Beth Pan: Cool.
Aditya Ramnathkar: Okay. Along with all these software optimizations that are available to all Windows 11 devices, today we also introduced Surface RTX Spark Dev Box. It is a developer first GPU machine coming with the new NVIDIA RTX Spark that provides up to 1 petaflop of AI compute and 128 GB of unified memory access.
Nikola Metulev: I'm getting there on day one.
Aditya Ramnathkar: That's great, and it also comes optimized with all our amazing developer tools already available by default.
Beth Pan: What's that mean? Shut up and take my money.
Aditya Ramnathkar: Okay. Let's roll the video.
[ Music ]
Beth Pan: Awesome. I think a lot of the things today that we talked about are actually based off of our developer audience's feedback. We call it "voice of the developer." We treat that very seriously. Some of them take a long time to come out as well. We'll do a good job in the future, as well, to go take our communities with us and build a great Windows environment for our developers, yeah.
Aditya Ramnathkar: We have shipped a lot of developer goodness today, so we'd love for all our developer community to go try out these, integrate them in your workflows, and let us know what you think about it.
Beth Pan: Cool. I think that's it.
Aditya Ramnathkar: That's it, yep.
Martin Vliem: Thanks everybody.
Aditya Ramnathkar: Thank you so much.
[ Music ]
END
