Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: DEM334
In a one-on-one chat, an agent and you can typically transact in like a long form text, but that long form text does not translate into group group chats. It becomes a lot more difficult for you to converse and have effective conversations if the agent is constantly spamming you with long walls of text.
And for that we have three solutions. We've got 3 pillars that form the successful collaborative agents and teams. Pillar one, manners. Just like we humans have developed innate capabilities to understand when to reply to a message in the form of a thread
when to create a thread when to respond in a thread or when to quote a previous message from a Co worker. Let's say Lily's message in a channel. When to respond, when to not respond, when to react with the emoji, when to not react with the emoji.
Those are intuitive norms or social norms that we have developed over the years. We want to expose those same norms and same capabilities to agents for them to behave in the same way as humans do. Next pillar, privacy. Trust is earned. There's so much that we trust in each other as humans, and in order to bring that same level of trust and privacy to agents, agents and group chats carry a lot of context. So enabling agents to have private conversations with you becomes a game changer and a very important pillar for successful collaborative agents.
Pillar three, Polish. Not every single interaction can be a long wall of text. Polish can take multiple forms. Scannable, structured, interactive. Those are means of accomplishing an outcome, and you've seen them in every single agent interaction. You want to bring that to you in Teams, so I'm going to pass it to Lily who's going to talk us through the first pillar and give you give you guys a bunch of announcements for that. Yeah, so at first we have manners. Being a good teammate isn't just about what you say, it's about how you say it. And the same applies for Asians too. This year, we're super excited to announce emoji reactions.
We use them naturally in our day today. Someone posts an update, you throw a thumbs up, a heart, etcetera, and then you move on. It's lightweight, it's expressive, but it's easily understood. And now agents can speak that same language too. Whether it's acknowledging a message or signalling a long running task is in progress.
A custom emoji can say what would otherwise take a full sentence And the next we have quoted replies. We've all been in a fast moving chat where someone responds to a message 10 messages ago and we're all left scrolling back trying to figure out where that message is. We solved that for humans with quoted replies and now agents can use it too. Now when the agent responds, it could pin its exact message that it's addressing, so even 5 messages later there's no ambiguity about what it's answering.
And finally, we have threaded replies. Channels can have dozens of conversations happening at once, one about a design release, one about an incident, and then also a design review. When the agent replies, it shouldn't dump its answer into the main channel and add to the noise. Now with threaded replies, agents can respond exactly where the conversation is happening, keeping the channel clean and the context contained. Now let's jump back to the NSYS agent and see it in action. So despite having 99.5% reliability earlier, every engineering team runs into hurdles.
And unfortunately for us, we just found out that our site is unreachable. So now I'm going to take the NSYS agent in our incidents group chat where a lot of my members are, and get this resolved ASAP. So here I'm typing NSYS agent help.
The site is unreachable. And then immediately I can see the agent has received my request because first it's reacted to my message with the eyes emoji. This little signal goes a long way. I'm not left wondering if my message landed or if the agent is working on it.
I just know. And then right below that you can see it also responded via a threaded reply that it's begun the investigation by replying in the thread. The agent keeps the whole investigation scoped right here so the rest of the channel stays clean and anyone jumping in later has a full context in one place so it looks like the agent's looking into it.
And then Aaron and Nina have also jumped in. And now going forward, any of the information they share will be provided as context to the agent. And this just makes the agent more powerful for diagnosing issues better and with greater accuracy.
Now I'll pass it back to Umung. That was so awesome to see agents react with emojis, do quoted replies, reply in a thread. But the next pillar, privacy, is even more important and that is where you own the trust of an agent. And privacy really matters when you need your agent to be a trusted ally in times of severity. We are so excited to announce targeted messages from an agent. An agent can now recognize the capability for for a private message to you.
It can innately know that, hey, I need to send a private message privately to Umang and initiate that conversation without crowding the group chat. We're also super pumped to announce bidirectionality in that, which means you can also privately message an agent inside of a group chat. Which means that if I have an embarrassing question that I have to ask my teammate or to an agent, to my teammate, I can just ping her. But to an agent within a group chat, I can just do that using slash commands. So slash agent is the way for you to message privately.
Let's see that in the same NSYS demo that Lee talked about earlier. So we left the demo at Aaron and Nina acknowledging that there has been an incident. Now I'm going to I just got a message privately that says that only you can see this message from the agent saying that
hey looks like the feature flag that you rolled out is suspiciously close to when the outage happened. The agent determined that I am the author.
I was the one who could have been responsible for this outage. So it sent me a private message saying that do you want to investigate this? This is what seems to be happening. And then I send a private message back to the agent using slash commands and say that yes, let's do that. So slash nsys agent, I would love for you to investigate.
Then I'll slash nsys agent, yes, please go forward. And now the NSYS agent will send a private message back to me saying that's initiating the conversation. And then once this chain of private messages between me and the agent has sort of concluded, I want to now publicly tell everyone in the chat that, hey, we are diagnosing this, we're on it.
So now this message gets sent publicly, but the above 3 messages remain private to this thread. This capability helps you develop so much trust with the agent, and the agent develops so much trust with you. It's such a good bidirectional relationship that you can have with agents inside of group settings. Awesome. So we already covered manners and privacy, our first two pillars.
Let's talk about our last third one, which is Polish. There's a big gap between an agent that responds versus an agent that communicates, and Polish is what ties that knot. First, we have adaptive cards.
Some of you might have used it before, familiar with the term, but really the benefits are twofold. Adaptive cards give us a more interactive, polished experience than a wall of tags. And they also let the agent embed real call to actions right inside of the message itself. For example, let's say APR is ready for review and the agent sends me a link that I have to click out to.
It's a little tedious. Versus with a card, it's able to provide me the title, a description, the author, as well as a comment and a proof button so I never have to leave teams at all. And then last but not least, a lot of you have been asking for this, so we're super excited to announce Markdowns.
Cards are great when you want to click into something, but sometimes you wish just want to be able to quickly scan a wall of text. And that's how Markdown comes in. It's a table, a code block, a bolded value. Markdown let's the agent shape its response right on the fly, right inside of the message itself. And as we all know, LMS love to speak in Markdown as well.
So let's go back to the demo now. Remember when Umang was demoing earlier, there was a private targeted interaction with the agent and Ensis said they were looking into it. So let's see if there's been any progress.
Great. So it looks like they've investigated and it's correlated with the checkout Edge cash B2 feature flag. I'm going to ask the agent to now roll things back because we definitely don't want this in production again. I'm still in the incidence group chat and I'm going to @the BA which means it's a public message.
It's no longer private because I want my colleagues to know about it as well. And then I get 2 messages back and the 1st is a quota reply. So ANSYS is now asking for my approval via this quoted reply because it is a critical feature.
And then right below it, if you'll take a look closer, it is an adaptive card. But I want you to just ignore this for a second and imagine that the agent actually sent me a wall of texts instead. And then I respond and I say I approve. But then Umang doesn't see that message yet, so he sends. I approve as well.
And then Nina says it looks good to her. Whose message actually counted as that final approval? And then let's say we're rolling multiple features back. Whose message is correlated with which feature? It's ambiguous and it's hard to track. And that's why an adaptive card seals the deal. It keeps things controlled. It makes it formal, trackable and consistent. Every time the interaction is structured, the outcome is logged and everyone knows exactly what they're approving.
So if I take a closer look, it is the correct feature flag. Check out Edge Cash V2. It's 42% of traffic in North America, which is quite high, but the confidence is high on the agent. So I'm just going to go ahead and approve that rollback. So it looks like it was reverted and the rollback went through the active roll out rings. And then it looks like Nina and Aaron are also seeing improvements now, which is super awesome. So traditionally agents would dump everything into a wall of text.
It's hard to scan. It's easy to lose those important bits, but now agents can respond in a clean, structured markdown format, and that's exactly what the anxious agent has provided us today. So it's like recovery is complete and green failure rate is dropping fast and things are resolved. So we're wrapped up with this agent.
That was so awesome. We saw so many features and capabilities for group effectiveness that I'm going to recap this all for you. So first up, we saw emoji reactions, which is the ability for your agent to give you a <3 to give you a thumbs up emoji and react back to you. It does not have to respond or speak every single time.
Next we saw targeted messages and slash commands which is the ability for an agent to privately message you and for you to privately message the agent back keeping the trust and privacy intact with the agent in all context of group settings.
Third we saw quoted replies which essentially says that hey if I have a long running task for an agent and if my message to the agent went back in history and let's say got an emoji reaction for it 10 messages later the agent can quote me and give me a quoted reply with all the kit with all the answers that it has brought for me. Next we spoke about threaded reply which means both initiating A threaded reply and also identifying the right thread to respond to which means that your agents can now discover multiple threads respond to the right thread.
Keep the integrity of the conversation scoped to where it belongs and where it originated. 4th we also spoke about suggested actions that can be brought as adaptive cards or within your within the reply of your agent. We also spoke about Markdown support and how natively supporting Markdown and Teams is now a first class availability that we have and we are offering.
We also spoke about a bunch of other features that we got to build last year, which is source citations, adaptive cards, response streaming, feedback buttons, AI insensitivity labels. So we do have a fully feature packed library and a set of SDKS ready for you to go build agents in Teams, which are going to shine in collaborative spaces like channels, chats and meetings. So our call to action for you is to go try out the new capabilities in Teams, try out our new SDKAK dot Ms. slash Teams SDK. Yesterday we also had another session on the Team CLI and the team skills, which was essentially just taking your agent and building it into Teams in under 25 minutes.
So go watch the recording if you were not able to attend it or go try, go try the new team CLI. They're so excited to see what you built and we cannot wait to connect with you. Thank you so much.
Any questions, please feel free to join us.
END
