Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: LIVE109
Speakers: Scott Guthrie, Seth Juarez
Seth Juarez: Hello, my friends and welcome back to Build. I am excited. I'm Seth Juarez. I'm here with my friend Scott Guthrie. How you doing, my friend?
Scott Guthrie: I'm doing well, Seth.
Seth Juarez: Fantastic, so are you enjoying Build, first of all.
Scott Guthrie: I am.
Seth Juarez: Fantastic, so let's start first -- I want to start because I want to get into this. What's top of mind for you, for developers, as you're here, and tell us what you do so people can know. They all know, but I want you to tell them.
Scott Guthrie: Sure. My job is, I run Azure and the overall Microsoft Cloud infrastructure. Everything that we showed today runs on top of that. My team and I are sort of involved in everything at the base level, and then, also, at the data platform and several of the higher-level services. Things that are top of mind for me are how do we keep building out the infrastructure to support the AI revolution that's happening? I spend an awful lot of time working on adding data centers, network, compute, and storage to make all that possible.
How do we do it more cost effectively? A lot of the innovations we talked about, even today in the keynote, around Azure Maya and Azure Cobalt in terms of our first-party silicon. How do we take a large percentage of the cost out of AI solutions? Then how do we enable AI that's rock-solid reliable super-fast super-performant and enables all the higher-level tooling whether it's GitHub Copilot or other tools Microsoft 365 and our overall agentic solutions
to be a platform that you can then build amazing AI solutions with?
Seth Juarez: Let's talk a little bit about the fundamentals because this is the cool part about Azure is that there's a ton of operating system fundamentals. Can you give people a sense of the scale of this stuff? We have a ton of data centers. Tell us about that.
Scott Guthrie: Yeah, I mean, I think in our earnings report, we kind of quoted that we added over a gigawatt of data centers in 90 days, and gigawatt is a lot. It's like the size of Seattle, and so we're growing fast and we're doing it, as Satya talked about in the keynote, responsibly. Our data centers are zero water waste. They use less water than a restaurant does in an annual year. We invest very heavily in making sure the communities that we operate in, we're good stewards in terms of electricity prices, taxes, community engagement, because we want to be long-term members of the community. To do that, we have to act responsibly. There's an awful lot of work involved to do this all reliably, at scale, on a consistent basis, in 80-plus locations and countries around the world. That's the fun.
Seth Juarez: You say that with there's a lot of -- tell us about the work involved because these things, we just have them turned on and we're super excited about it, but there's a lot of work that goes on to do that.
Scott Guthrie: Yeah, you need to get land. You need to get power.
You need to get permitting. Some of these sites have 6,000 workers on them, in terms of doing construction. It's very precision tradecraft.
This is not just anyone can walk up. You're talking about people with 5-10 years of experience in terms of electrical, cooling, and other construction things. This is really tradecraft, and you've got to do it safely. We take safety incredibly importantly because at the end of the day -- we have signs that we put up on our job sites "The most important part of the day is you go home alive and safe." Because this is high electrical equipment this is heavy equipment you can't take that for granted. Thankfully, we have one of the best safety records, and again, one of the best environmental records in the industry. We're kind of growing at scale.
Then there's the software that goes with it.
Seth Juarez: Yeah, of course.
Scott Guthrie: When you're growing at the rate we're growing, we're constantly having to change the network architecture and change the storage architectures. There's huge supply chain constraints in the world on memory, on SSDs, and hard drives. You're constantly, also, having to architect new ways of doing things to, basically, handle what is effectively a doubling of capacity every two years or so. Generally, in software, almost no software when it's handles 10x the scale works. If you're doubling every two years, you kind of need to be starting on the next generation almost immediately upon shipping the current generation, because you'll be at that next generation very quickly.
Seth Juarez: That's surprising, because it's, obviously, something I haven't considered, because if your doubling scale -- everyone's built software on your website and it works great when your mom looks at it or your dad, right? Then all of a sudden, when thousands and then hundreds of thousands and -- you have to change the way you think about how to architect the software on top of the core. What are some innovations that would be surprising to folks here and watching that maybe they hadn't considered needed to be done?
Scott Guthrie: Well, I think one of the things, and we've benefited with our partnership with OpenAI, as an example, with some of our data services, and with Azure in general. Just giving one example would be memory and chat history, and authentication. In a world where you've got an agent that's running all over the world, if all those agents have to go back to a single database, at some point, your database will fall over.
Seth Juarez: Right.
Scott Guthrie: It will not be able to scale to the load of a ChatGPT or Claude or Copilot. How do you architect your database layer so that you can scale linearly? A lot of the work we did in Cosmos DB as an example was to enable where we can basically do a separate instances of Cosmos in every region but then do eventual consistency of the chat history so that if any region has an issue you just go seamlessly to the next region and away you go but you don't have any synchronous locks anywhere. That way, you can replicate scale units.
You can keep growing in a very natural way. That'd be one example. The trick would be things like attachments, when you upload something into ChatGPT, if you store it in the database, and everyone's uploading documents now and images, that database gets really big.
How do we do external attachments and spill over to Blob storage, where we effectively are doing an archival level costs, but at the same time, having the ability to write SQL against it, and then having a globally replicated state store. That type of thing is not easy. What makes it particularly not easy is when these apps are evolving constantly, you can't take it down for a day to upgrade the schema.
You kind of need to keep the plane running in the air while you swap out the engines. That's part of the fun of running a live service.
Seth Juarez: I think that's a really good pivot, because we kind of touched on it a little bit. A lot of the Azure core stuff is data, and there's a lot of data products that we have in terms of like breadth and specificity and kinds. Can you talk about those a little bit?
Scott Guthrie: Yeah, we have broadly inside our Azure data services three types of operational data services. One is our SQL family of products. In particular, we've kind of taken our traditional on-prem SQL and made it a great cloud native solution. Then with SQL hyperscale, they're really enabling SaaS-based applications where you can have elastic pools, so that you can maintain sort of a logical database per customer. You're effectively running it on a PaaS service that's shared across customers.
That's been great. Cosmos DB is our cloud-native, no-SQL solution. As I mentioned, ChatGPT and Copilot and Teams and a whole bunch of other customers use that, Adobe and others. It's really, really good for cloud native and especially agentic scale. One of the big services that we just went public preview on today is Horizon DB which is our Postgres service that is really a cloud native Postgres that's designed to enable horizontal scale out and it's Postgres compatible but really enables a much much larger scale Postgres database than what we've historically supported with our Postgres service in Azure which was 100% compatible with Postgres.
Because it's 100% compatible means that you're kind of scaling the traditional relational database in a more compatible, but at the same time, scale-limited way. Horizon DB we're super excited about. It has AI built in, as does Cosmos and SQL.
Between those three, we've got a really good set of offerings. Then the big thing that we're really excited about is our Fabric, Microsoft Fabric, which is our analytics stack. That has what we call OneLake, where you can store any type of data, inclusive of Databricks and Snowflake tables, can be mounted in it in a zero-copy kind of way, meaning it shows up but you don't have to transfer data in and out. Then Fabric gives you kind of a data warehouse.
It gives you streaming capabilities and a bunch more. One of the things that we talked about today and is now GA is our Fabric IQ, which basically takes the semantic models of Power BI, takes all the data from Fabric or from Databricks and Snowflake, and can surface it in Microsoft 365 Copilot. So suddenly, when people are asking questions inside their organization, we can leverage anything that's in Power BI dashboards or in the semantic models or the data behind it to give much, much better answers.
Collectively that makes up sort of the Azure data services.
Seth Juarez: Yeah, and it's quite expansive because you can choose between no-SQL. You can choose from SQL. You can choose from Postgres if you want, but it's a special kind of Postgres that scales. Can you give us a sense of the kind of scale that you can get to with these services?
Scott Guthrie: Well, I mean, in terms of storage perspective, we had exabytes of storage per week now across Azure, and so it's a lot of data. I remember once upon a time a petabyte was considered a lot of data. An exabyte is a thousand times a petabyte and we're adding multiples of those a week.
You can scale these things to be really, really big. Again, part of the challenge of agentic for all of us is when you have users that are hitting your apps, the amount of database traffic you get on your app when you have a web UI or mobile UI and it's a user on the other end, you might get a thousand requests a second would be a very busy web app. With agents, you will get to millions of requests per second. I think one of the things that apps are starting to struggle with is, as you start to have agents that go after things, you can get very quickly 10, 20, 30x the volume of API requests that you historically did.
Usually the first thing to buckle in your architecture is your relational database or your data system and that's why it's going to be super important to have these services that can scale and have flexibility so that you can also adopt both relational and no-SQL solutions including the ability to globally replicate it and have local copies everywhere around the world for fast latency
in order to handle that new workflow.
Seth Juarez: This is a good pivot because I think now we need to talk about how AI is changing everything. What is different now? We have about two minutes. Tell us about how AI is changing, how Fabric is helping with the IQ and the context, the data. Tell us about that.
Scott Guthrie: I think with agents, fundamentally, it's changing everything over the next couple of years in the same way that mobile smartphone apps changed everything in terms of our consumer experience, the same way the web browser changed. We've had multiple of these waves, but agentic builds on everything that came before, and I think it's a new level of cognition capabilities that we historically didn't have inside our apps. I think architecturally, I kind of talked about data being key. AI is only really good if you have got good data.
Seth Juarez: That's right.
Scott Guthrie: AI with bad data kind of sucks or has bad decisions, so how do you surface the data inside your organization?
That's where the IQ layer really comes into play. How do you scale that data so that your system doesn't fall over and that your costs don't explode is going to be key. Then there's a whole bunch of other things at the infrastructure layer, things like VM start time or the ability to run and bring up lots of machines quickly ephemerally, because you want to have, say, a Claw sandbox, run something for a couple of minutes, tear it down, and then immediately have a new one. There's a bunch of architectural things, both at the software layer that we're investing in, and then even things like Cobalt, which is our ARM64 processor, is much, much faster at bringing up machines. The whole memory architecture and the overall subsystem at the silicon layer is really optimized for these sometimes short-lived, agentic apps at scale that are sandboxed. The things like MTC that we talked about today in Windows that we're adding, are also going to be key to that architecture. I think with agents, it's not just about the AI.
It really is going to be sort of a whole evolution of the way software, both operating systems, cloud, infrastructure, dev tools, security, compliance, monitoring, AI ops, everything is going to change all at once.
Seth Juarez: Well, thanks for ending on that. Everything is going to change. Thanks so much for being with us, my friend.
Scott Guthrie: It's going to be a fun ride.
Seth Juarez: It's a fun ride. Thank you so much, and we'll see you in a little bit.
Scott Guthrie: Thanks, everyone.
[ Music ]
END
