Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: LIVE176
Speakers: Betsy Weber, Fernanda Saraiva, Jeremy Sinclair, Priyanka Shah
Fernanda Saraiva: Hello everyone! We are here representing MVP program. I'm Fernanda Saraiva. I'm the Program Manager, and also responsible for engaging the amazing product groups with our community. And I'm followed by Betsy.
Betsy Weber: Thank you. I'm Betsy Weber, a Senior Engagement Lead, and I've been on the MVP team almost 10 years. With me, we've got --
Jeremy Sinclair: I'm Jeremy Sinclair. I am a Windows Development MVP and also a Developer Technologies MVP.
Priyanka Shah: And I'm Priyanka and a Microsoft Foundry MVP and I am coming all the way over from Australia here. Arrived yesterday.
Fernanda Saraiva: That's awesome. Thanks, everyone. Welcome. So MVP program is a recognition program that has been around for 30 years. Just recognizing the amazing community leaders that we have around the world. So right now, we are a little over 4,000, right Betsy?
Betsy Weber: Yes.
Fernanda Saraiva: And tell me a little bit more. How can an MVP be recognized?
Betsy Weber: So the MVP Award is Microsoft's way of saying thank you to the people that give back in the community, sharing their knowledge freely and openly, all about the Microsoft products and services. So we've got about 4,000 MVPs worldwide. They are in 96 different countries and speak 49 different languages. So it truly is a global community.
Fernanda Saraiva: And it's really engaging. Because I think we have here Jeremy and Priyanka. They can tell us a little bit more on how it's important to make impact and help Microsoft products to succeed. So let's start a little bit on the conversation here. So tell me a little bit more. Why don't you lead the MVP program recognition has brought to you professionally, Jeremy? Can you share a little bit more?
Jeremy Sinclair: Yes. The MVP program has brought many opportunities to me professionally. It's fantastic to be recognized even by other companies who've seen some of my contributions through open source products. I've been reached out to various companies because they see my passion. They know what I do because I talk about everything, and I make sure that there is impact with my work.
Fernanda Saraiva: That's great.
Betsy Weber: So as an MVP, do you have to write a blog?
Jeremy Sinclair: No. You don't have to write a blog. I mostly interact on socials. So X, LinkedIn, BlueSky mostly. But I rarely write blogs, because I just put all my work on there.
Betsy Weber: Priyanka, as an MVP, do you have to run a user group?
Priyanka Shah: Yes, we do. And I think because the way we are pursued as technology leaders in the community, the user groups which we run, they make an impact in the sense that we get an (inaudible) for technology sharing, but then also we bring the community together. And because right now AI is such a evolving, ever-changing space, so which means these kinds of user groups, meet up on a regular basis do help technologists get together, give them a platform to learn, to share, and to grow.
Betsy Weber: So as MVPs, Microsoft's always looking for people that are passionate and they're doing what they love and they're sharing their knowledge. So we want you to give back to the community in the ways you want to give back. And I know Priyanka, you've run Agent Con and Agent Camp, right?
Priyanka Shah: Yes.
Betsy Weber: Why did you run these events?
Priyanka Shah: Oh, perfect. So as I said, because there's so much happening in the technology space right now, and especially agentic AI, agentic frameworks are the new buzzwords, the new kids on the block. And there's been so many people, students especially, practitioners, and mid-level career people coming up to me and asking, we hear a lot about agents, but then how to go about (inaudible) agents?
Where do I start? Where do I (inaudible) from my current workforce. And which again got us to running this flagship events which are (inaudible) global (inaudible) community, and we are ambassadors in the global (inaudible) community.
We run country chapters or city chapters inside of a region. So Agent Con (inaudible) global (inaudible) community was one such a (inaudible) to then actually set up different types of sessions just to clarify the agentic ecosystem. And it was not just restricted to Microsoft Foundry.
So there are like, OpenClaw. Then there's anthropic ecosystems. So all of Microsoft and Microsoft ecosystem partners clarifying the tools, the practical use cases, what enterprises are doing. So we had some of our clients come and showcase how they are using agents in their day-to-day enterprise workloads. And that became sort of a platform for people to understand agents, hygiene practices to build agents, and Agent Con was about learning about agents. And then the logical next step was Agent Camp, which was like, okay, now you know agents. Then come along and now start building agents. Like, start learning how to build agents.
So one was like an introduction chapter, and then the next one, the Agent Camp, which we did a couple of months ago was all around getting your hands actually dirty with building agentic ecosystems.
Fernanda Saraiva: That seems a lot of work. I just got tired just listening to it, because I know that that is a lot of passion evolving today, and the more you pitch, the more you learn, and the more you want to keep going and going. And this is the main goal of this program is just really make sure that we are contributing to your system, to your progress, to your evolution. So then of course, you can just come back to us and tell what is working, what is not working. How can we actually prove a program? So Jeremey, I believe you might be in the same, similar route that Priyanka. And that's a lot of work that you do. So is that a lot (inaudible)? How actually you do to actually balance your life, your work, and your career, and your aspirations? Tell us a little bit more, like how is actually put all this passion together into a single day?
Jeremy Sinclair: Yes. So for me, I love to develop. I have many ideas. I have become an MVP for things that I use to kind of decompress from a day and just I wanted to get excited. So I've seen (inaudible) what can I look at? What can I help out with? And many times, I'm just thinking of things in the back of my head.
Something that hasn't worked properly. And so I'm like, alright, it's time to work on this. I go looking through GitHub. I go looking on socials.
And I see that there's someone having another issue. So maybe I've found a workaround to it. I go help them out, or I'll contribute to open source. For example, one of my favorite repositories is the PowerToys repository.
I bring this up because that -- yes that repository -- this is for you Clint -- repository brought me a lot of what people knew about.
And that's I ported PowerToys to run natively on ARM 64 because it didn't run on my Surface Pro S. That was the core reason. But then at the same time, I started learning more, started interacting with the team. And I started helping out and I learned things from them. So it's great that I can give back and I can learn things, and I can contribute to other spots. I gain more confidence by giving back to community and seeing the community interact.
So that's my Number 1 goal is to do what I can to allow the community to feel comfortable with getting out there.
Betsy Weber: So you brought something, Jeremy, you mentioned how it was rewarding, the things you do in the community. So as an MVP, there's several benefits to becoming one. For instance, you have access to the product groups, so you can share that feedback around those products and services that you love and use. There's also things like sneak peeks or previews or you get information before the public gets to learn about stuff. What is the most rewarding part of being an MVP?
Jeremy Sinclair: The most rewarding part of being MVP is you have that badge of honor and for me, I have imposter syndrome. So even every time it's time for renewal, I'm thinking I'm not going to get this. I'm not going to get this. But then I look at what I've actually accomplished, and I'm like you know what? I can do this another year. I can do this. And so I start pinging up yet another random project to work on. And then I see the interaction with the Microsoft employees who reach out and say hey, we got (inaudible) preview for you to look at. And it just so happens to tie in with something that I'm looking at for an exploration. And so there's feedback right there. And so it was cool. There was a few of those announcements that came out today that I have been participating in.
Fernanda Saraiva: -- everything play in your mind.
Jeremy Sinclair: Oh yes.
Fernanda Saraiva: I want to do it. I have my hands on it.
Jeremy Sinclair: Absolutely. It's just so rewarding to be of use, because you get that feedback, and you're not just another person.
Fernanda Saraiva: Yes. And we tell, MVP program is available avenue, because all those leaders are incredibly valuable for Microsoft as well. We praise every single bit of feedback every single experience from real work that you guys have that is shared back to our products in the shape of improvements recognition or a way to just -- even positive feedback.
"I love it; it works." "I do not like it. Maybe it should work this or this way." So this whole machine of contribution and recognition and it is exciting for Microsoft as well. So we always like to understand how the community continue to behave. And one of the things that we always want to know, if someone has never heard about communities, or anything, why do you think it have actually the trigger to start your career journey into the community? Or start your journey into the community? So what is this one thing that one day, you're just like, yes. I want to engage in a community.
So Priyanka, how will you share your experience about this topic?
Priyanka Shah: So for me, always came down to technology evangelism.
I'm a masters in data science, and even before all this gen AI hype, I was working towards upskilling, reskilling students especially around AI, machine learning, classic machine learning. And I was doing it kind of (inaudible) casual way. There was no channelizing or like pinpointed user meetup groups, those kind of things. So we just called it a casual coffee chats, or how should I put it? Like local meetups.
It was not community. It was just evangelism in an already informal setting. And then when I was approached for this kind of channelization of the meetups which we do and then the first time and I was actually presenting on ml.net and actually doing a demo and then actually enriching and looking at that feedback and that satisfaction on the audience. Oh, this is how it is done (inaudible) oh this is something new. This is how things would work. And that kind of thing.
And I had that passion in me. I think for people who want to get into this journey a community evangelism or technology evangelism just does not mean speaking at public events or as we say upskilling
reskilling many of (inaudible) geeks who I know they do this technology sharing by blogs. Writing. Maybe people do not have that kind of public speaking (inaudible).
Could be very well. They are happy doing their modes and codes. But then a lot of people who I know contribute using your GitHub checkin repositories, (inaudible) requests, blogs, technology reviews, writing books. So that platform which you get, which you can express your passion, that could be anything.
Public speaking, event organizing, even webinars, seminars, academic contributions. So my point is pick your passion. What are you passionate about?
And just start on that.
Betsy Weber: I love that. I think that's such great advice. I hear from people, and they say do I have to do everything? All the things? And really to get the MVP Award, just follow your passion and give back in a way that you want to give back. So thank you. That's great advice. So now that you both have been MVPs for a while, how has your professional or personal life changed after receiving the MVP award?
Jeremy Sinclair: Well my personal and professional life, I feel like I can walk with some swagger because I have that MVP on me. And I can say guess what? I am the only Microsoft MVP in the entire state of West Virginia. I love to bring that up because, I know, thinking West Virginia, most people see -- I don't know, they see a farm and that's that. But this state has so much talent. And I'm proof of that. That's why I want everyone, if you have any idea, or you think you can't do it, like I'm proof you can. So Number 1 advice to anyone who wants to be in this program, just keep your drive. Don't think that whatever you're doing isn't enough. Just keep at it and make sure that you're interacting with others, interacting with the community. Don't be afraid. Just any little bit of contribution, that adds up.
Priyanka Shah: For me, one of the important things is I work in the consulting space. I work in the system integration space. So the MVP title, and especially (inaudible) specialization like Foundry AI, that means my customers have a lot of trust in what I'm communicating to them. They also look up to us as technology leaders who have a valid channel of communication with Microsoft PMs and product groups. Also that helps them bridge the gap between the current things versus what is coming in future, what they should plan for.
Should they go live enterprise (inaudible) or should they stop at a POC stage? That's from a client perspective. From my personal perspective
as I said as this space grows I find myself more in the role of a mentor as well where I am trying to communicate all of these new skills tools to the new generation equipping them to get themselves upskilled
reskilled for what is to come. What are the kind of skills, revolution we are seeing right now. And I just think that it's passion. So I don't feel that how I have an extra work. Like we have hobbies (inaudible) for me it's like a technology contribution. Some community contribution. So it's a passion.
I just love doing what I do.
Fernanda Saraiva: And this is what actually moves the needle. Because those that if you don't know how to start sometimes, that you're already doing community and they don't know. By sharing with others, by contributing with others, by playing with others in your company, in your group of friends, by educating, maybe it's part of your profession. So it's interesting to know the different experiences this way. Especially for those that sometimes feel like community is too much. What do I actually need to do to become a community leader? And I think I would love to -- we're just close to the end of this presentation. I think we can just, both of you, you're just meeting someone for the first time, just give your best remark of what means for you, being an MVP. Jeremy.
Jeremy Sinclair: What it means for me to be an MVP, means that I've been chosen to be an MVP for a reason. And so, like I said before, that brings me -- it makes me feel better as a person. Makes me want to give back to the community. It makes me want to keep growing, both personally and professionally. Getting all those professional relationships with others, then keeping in communication. The building future.
Priyanka Shah: It's the mindshare which I get to how with likeminded individuals globally. And one advice I have to all the aspiring people to join the MVP program is the program is just a benefit. It's not your end goal. The passion and contribution should stay. The award just comes as an add-in. So keep your passion, and that's it.
Fernanda Saraiva: That's awesome. Thanks, everyone. Thanks for joining. To learn more, aka.ms/MVP/learn. So thank you.
[ Music ]
END
