Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: OD806
Speakers: Chet Husk, Richard Lander
Chet Husk: Hey, folks, welcome to Microsoft Build 2026, and welcome, especially, to a survey of.NET 11 runtime libraries and SDK improvements. I'm Chet Husk, and I'm a Product Manager on the SDK and MSBuild teams and here with me today is --
Richard Lander: Yeah, I'm Rich Lander. I'm also a Product Manager on the.NET team, and I'm going to be talking about runtime and libraries.
Chet Husk: Awesome. We've got a great packed flow for you today. We're going to start by looking at some of the SDK and tooling level improvements and initiatives in the.NET 11 timeframe. Then we'll yield over to Rich to go a little bit lower in the stack, because all the stuff we're going to show you at the tooling layer builds on the work that he and his teams have been doing.
With no further ado, let's step right in. The.NET SDK has three major work streams that we've been working on for the.NET 11 releases. The first is new capabilities and new user experiences. The second is a strong focus on performance all the way through the stack. The third is sort of lightening the load of acquisition and management of our tools.
We've got some top-level notes here, but we'll go into a lot of these in more detail, as well, after some of the framing of why we think these are important and who these units of work are for. Some of the things that we'll be looking at are net-new CLI features as well as changes to features that are well used today to make them more workable or more efficient in an LLM context. Performance is a focus for us because it's -- with the rise of agents and the sort of accelerated inner loop requirements that we have for these repeated multiagent scenarios, we want to make sure that every command you run is as fast as possible.
Let's dive right into some examples of the work that we've been doing on UX. For years now, dotnet run has been sort of the backbone of the inner loop when you're working on your projects, you would "dotnet run" a project and it would run, and in.NET 10, we added ways to expand how projects could, you know, "hook" how they run. This led to enhancements around running Azure functions in the emulator, for example. Well, one area that hadn't received quite as much love here was MAUI and device specific running of applications on your devices.
When you run a MAUI application, you typically have to not just build the product, but also build some kind of an installation payload, push it to a device, and then run that payload on that device. Well, starting in.NET 11, the MAUI team has contributed enhancements to dotnet run to make device flows a first-class citizen in the dotnet run experience. They've also expanded the.NET MAUI targets so that run actually handles that device deployment. As you can see in the image that we're looking at here we're seeing an application that is using dotnet run to pick the target framework it wants to deploy to
pick a device that is valid for that target framework and then upload the device payload to that device and launch it on that simulator. This is a really powerful example of just making common workflows something that is part of the first-class knowledge that dotnet run has. What's important about this is that run also now understands how to query the devices you have available, and this entire protocol is something that's extensible. It works not just for MAUI, but it could be extended to support Uno or Avalonia or any of your favorite UI frameworks.
So that was a really exciting contribution that we really thank the MAUI team for. Moving on, we want to make sure that the dotnet CLI works nicely with agents of all kinds. To this end, we put work into the dotnet CLI to make it aware of when it is being run under an agent context.
This is necessarily kind of a heuristic based approach, but once we have this knowledge, this lets us do two important categories of work. It lets us change the way that we render output to the output streams that are available to us, and it helps us understand more about who is driving us and their usage patterns so that we can change our internal behavior. Some examples of this are that the terminal logger
which is the default build display starting in.NET 10 has a static section where your project outputs are emitted and then a dynamic portion where it's constantly updating and showing what targets are being built for each project that is being built. Well, LLMs interpret that live portion as a very token inefficient stream of constant changes.
Armed with this new knowledge that the CLI has, we have been able to disable that live update when we are run in an LLM context. This is a very simple example, but the core idea of understanding when we are in an LLM context and using that to change behavior is something that we're taking to heart throughout the entire dotnet CLI. In addition, we are introducing and exploring new concepts that are more common thanks to agents.
These days, it's more common for agents to spawn off separate worktrees, which are a Git technique for creating shallow clones of a repo at different branches so that work can be done in parallel. However, when you run dotnet build, that operation is not normally aware of any other build that's going on in the machine, and this can lead to significant amounts of resource tension on your machine -- or contention rather. We're looking at strategies like a sort of central gatekeeper for MSBuild that all builds have to route through that can delegate resources to each individual build, so that your overall machine remains responsive. This is an example of something that was kind of historically always a weakness in our tooling.
It was very one-shot focused, but with the rise of agents and the rise of parallel work on a single machine, it's become much more necessary that we take steps to address this scenario. This category of work is something you should expect to see more of in the dotnet CLI overall. When you do choose to do work with the dotnet CLI, though, we want that work to be fast. We are starting on a journey to make the dotnet CLI a NativeAOT application.
I'm incredibly excited for this. Some of the recent milestones that we've hit here are that many of these sort of standalone but bundled tools you use in the dotnet CLI, like the User Secrets, dev certs, and JSON Web token services are NativeAOT as of two weeks ago now. Starting in Preview 6, you'll see this. The net result of this is improved performance and responsiveness for these commands.
We have some example numbers here for.NET User Secrets that Damian Edwards and I took a week ago. On average, on his Windows machine,.NET User Secrets, the AOT form took about 54 milliseconds to run. Of that, only 14 milliseconds was the actual application. The rest was the managed dotnet CLI overhead there. We'll talk about that more in just a second. Why are we doing this NativeAOT push? Well
first off it's because the dotnet CLI is used so frequently that any amount of performance that we can contribute to its shared base multiplies incredibly well so even shaving 100 milliseconds off of every command translates to real benefits given the number of times each individual developer issues a command.
Also, it's an ecosystem play for us. Many of the tools that we make depend on libraries that we also make, and some of those libraries were not AOT- or trim-friendly. By setting a milestone of the dotnet CLI being an AOT application, that forced us to investigate these technical and process blockers and start knocking them down. Just over the course of the.NET 11 development cycle so far, we've been able to make really common libraries like templating and NuGet and even parts of MSBuild more trim-friendly.
This is an ongoing effort, and not all use cases are trim-friendly yet, but it is kind of the North Star for the overall effort. The hope is that especially with some of these NuGet libraries, unblocking these core Microsoft provided libraries from being trim friendly makes it possible for the entire ecosystem to make trimmed and AOT applications more effectively. That's just some of the bundled tools, but the big thing here, the big news, is that the entire dotnet CLI is on its arc to be AOT as well. Some of the technical blockers I mentioned, I've touched on already, but some of the other ones were complete replacements. We had telemetry libraries, for example, that we had to migrate to OpenTelemetry.
We had old com patterns that needed to be made trim friendly. A lot of this was stuff that the runtime had already provided, and we just had not taken advantage yet. We're hopeful that the dotnet CLI taking advantage of those will start to lead to, sort of, real benefits to our end users, as well as championing NativeAOT as a valid and awesome technology in its own right. An example of some of the wins we get from this, you can see in this Aspire Dashboard trace below -- that's right.
Now that the dotnet CLI emits OTEL, you can use the Aspire Dashboard and all of the Aspire tools you're familiar with to trace it. In this display that you're seeing, the top five spans all come from the native portion of the dotnet CLI now, and the bottom five come from the managed portion of the dotnet CLI. Over time, we will be moving more and more commands into the native space as their technical blockers are eliminated and as our resources allow. We're trying to optimize commands that are both dependency free, relatively speaking, as well as frequently used by the community to kind of maximize the benefit there.
Right now, we're looking at the.NET solution management commands, but other commands that are high up on my personal list are template related and tool management related. This leads us to a place where we might even have scenarios like the DNX command being a standalone NativeAOT application. It's a really exciting step for us, and it opens up a whole bunch of opportunities that we'll hopefully be talking about later in future releases.
We are hitting some more highlights here. We're embracing threads in MSBuild, in.NET 11, and not just processes. Today's MSBuild uses a multi-process architecture that is great for isolation and safety but has high overheads in terms of inter-process communication costs in things like CoreCLR JIT loading.
This multi-threaded mode is something we've been working on for a while, and it's not ready to use today, but it will be ready to use by the time.NET 11 launches. Look for more announcements there. If you are a task author, you can follow the link on this page, aka.ms/msbuild/mt-tasks, to learn more about the changes you would need to make to your task to adopt to this ecosystem. We think it is very promising in terms of performance here and opens up a whole bunch of additional optimizations that we can layer on top, but, again, look for more on this as we get better measurement numbers to share with you all. The final sort of pillar we wanted to tackle was Acquisition, and for this we have two main things we've been working on. The first is a NativeAOT tool called dotnet up, which we hope will give users who work on multiple platforms, or across team members that work on multiple platforms, a consistent way to acquire and manage their.NET toolchains. It does all the things that you would hope it would, support nightlies, use global.json if it's there, and it does this using user-level installs of the tooling, so no admin required. There will be previews of this tool coming soon, and that's like the Blizzard-style "soon" if you're a gamer. I did a dedicated recording of this for Build.
That should be up now, as well, so feel free to check that out if you want a deep dive on how it works and to take a look at it. Finally, the other arc of Acquisition we've been looking at is how you download the SDK today, and what you get when you download it. The SDK is downloaded many, many times for many reasons, not just for end users, but also, importantly, for containers, which are a primary way that people build their applications these days. To that end, we were looking at ways to reduce the on-disk size of the SDK, and we discovered that tarballs support what's called hard links, which are ways of pointing -- well, it's like symlinks.
It's pointing to files that share the exact same content to one canonical resource. We found a way to inspect the layouts of the SDK that we make every time we produce our tarballs and our packages of all kinds and do an automated unification and deduplication, and that has yielded incredible results. Over the course of the.NET 11 previews, so far, we have shaved quite a few megabytes -- somewhere on the order of 80-ish megabytes -- for all these different platforms, and more, from all of the SDK payloads. This is huge. A smaller payload is faster to get to you, and it's also just less overall network IO, especially for those SDK containers that I mentioned. This is an example of us building on the runtime's better knowledge of tarballs starting in.NET 7 building some confidence with tarballs through the SDK containerization feature and then applying that tarball confidence to our own packaging to deliver wins for our users and our customers.
I think that's a great segue to start talking about the runtime here because everything I just showed you would not be possible without the work that Rich and his teams have done. Rich, you want to take us through what's coming in 11?
Richard Lander: Yes.
Yeah, I love the tarball piece. You are very familiar with those APIs. I think you're our best user. Okay. Yeah, I want to talk about what's been happening in the libraries. In Preview 4, we announced a big update to the process API. You typically use this API to start a process, capture its results, things like that.
Unfortunately this is actually somewhat difficult and has been a long source of bugs for users so we now have a set of
sort of convenience APIs that we expose that do the sorts of things that you want do them correctly
and do it fast. I'm going to quickly go through those. The first one -- yeah, on the next slide. The first one is, oh, right, this is actually the bad case. We're going to go over that first. In this particular kind of somewhat made-up scenario, we're going to call "dotnet build" with full diagnostics. We're going to have both standard error and standard output, like, you know -- yeah, both of those present. The key point here is the two lines that end in "read to end." What actually happens and this is
quote/unquote "the bad thing." is there are buffers attached to both standard output and standard error. What happens is the code says, "Read standard output to the end before reading anything from the standard error stream." What happens is standard error, the buffer for that, gets filled up. The writer, which is basically dotnet build, it stops because it can't fill the thing up, but you're waiting for standard error to end.
This is, obviously, a deadlock, so you have to write code a different way to avoid this. Now I will transition to looking at how this works better. We have a series of new APIs that could do slightly different things depending on your use case. This one's called RunAndCaptureTextAsync. It gives you this object back, this process text output object, and it, basically, has all the information that you would want on it. It gives you all the standard output, all the standard error, and gives you the exit codes.
Then you can do whatever you want with them. The next one is called ReadAllLinesAsync. It's somewhat similar, except it allows you to "foreach over" all the lines.
Then you can ask the line if it's standard error or not and do whatever it is that you would like. This is also, as you can probably guess, more of a streaming type of model. The next one is -- this one allows you to do the same thing as, say, you know, the example here is dotnet help, pipe to grep. So if you're working on the shell, you might pipe all the time. I certainly do, so how do you write the same thing in C#? The big win here is actually with this CreateAnonymousPipe API. In this case, we have a reader and a writer, or sorry, read and write sides. Then we pass the write side to the standard output of the first command, and then we pass the read to the standard input of the second command.
It makes sense, right? Then we just start the two processes, and exactly the right thing happens. This is the entirety of the code that you need. Then we just wait for the second command to exit, and then everything is -- all the resources are released correctly.
Next one is a fire-and-forget story. Sometimes you just want to start a process and just have it do its thing, have it release resources correctly, and not do anything. In this case, the definition of fire-and-forget is that you're not trying to find out what the results were. This does this.
The only interesting nuance is you can either have the process killed on parent exit or not, depending on your use case. Chet spent a fair bit of time talking about NativeAOT and trimming. There's actually a separate API, a separate type, called SafeProcessHandle.
If trimming is something you're super-concerned about, then you can use this type instead. We've done work so that it trims better than the process type. Let's switch gears and talk about text processing. Much of this is about Unicode conformance. We now have two pairs of APIs for utf8 and utf16. One is called IsValid, and the other one is called IndexOfInvalidSubsequence. Where this is useful is
say if you're getting Unicode text from a file or over the wire and you're wanting to just validate that it's valid and then if it's not
know exactly where the bad code starts that's what this API does. It allows you to produce great error messages or have good diagnostics or whatever it is that you're doing. Another one is if you've done any text processing particularly that comes from a variety of operating systems
you'll know that new line measurement is quite a pain so there's a new regex option called AnyNewLine. It works like with r or n. I think it's got -- it has several new line variants that could be in the text that you are processing, so that's incredibly useful. Last is we've made some of the string methods Rune aware. Just a quick take on that if you're unaware say you're using utf16 strings and it's like oh
I've got these char values so clearly this can hold any Unicode quote/unquote "character." and we're all good to go. Well, it doesn't actually work that way. Lots of Unicode characters fit within 2 bytes, within 16 bits, but many actually don't.
The emojis are the kind of poster children of ones that don't. They can take multiple characters, two or more. Rune really describes a Unicode code point.
It could be a character. It could be a letter, a number, or an emoji. These APIs now work correctly with those. I think I have a demo, a quick bit of code, for that. It's a little bit of an eye chart. What this is showing is, say I want to do some analysis of Chet's comments on GitHub.
I think Chet is an amazing code reviewer and is often telling people, "Looks good to me, ship it." but sometimes Chet does this with emojis. This code, basically, what it's doing is it's saying, oh, I'm going to break all this text into new lines using the Regex new line capability. Then I am going to "foreach over" all of these lines and check to see if Chet specified any one of these ship-it style declarations. Then I'm going to print the context before and after this, this content.
I can see what Chet said for context, and then I'm going to follow up where I think he made the wrong call. So, yeah, that's super-useful. Just for one bit of clarity, if I was to really write this thing, I'm not sure I would actually use these particular APIs. I might actually use the search values APIs, which I'm a big fan of, but I thought this was a good way of showing these APIs. Okay.
Let's move on. System.text.Json, we've been working on this component for, I don't know, six or seven years or something like that. We keep on investing in it, which is great. One of the places, and I actually see this with agents, as well, is you want all this policy kind of in your -- for your serializer to say what it is that you want to happen. It's usually about naming or not emitting a particular property if it's null. Let's look at the code.
In this particular case, we're using -- we're able to specify for a whole type for event data that we don't want to write any properties when they're null for the entirety of the type. That's super useful and then if we go down to the bottom or the middle
actually we can see that we're setting adjacent serializer options which says that we want to use Pascal case for serializing. Then you can see that when we actually do serialize at the bottom, we use that option, so then Pascal case will obviously be our default.
Then if you go back up to the top, you'll see that for event name, we have an override, which says that we want to use camel case. So that's a new capability that gives you a little bit more control while still enabling all the convenience. Okay. I'm actually a big fan of JSON Lines.
I've been using it for a number of years. What JSON Lines is, is one JSON document per line. There's another variant called NDJSON, which is -- I think that's what it's called.
It's very, very similar. Actually, if you look at certain agents, they have these logs of the conversations, then they're often as JSON Lines. There's some scenarios where JSON Lines is absolutely the right choice. You can see in this example it's showing how we can async write the set of JSON documents that are produced by an IAsyncEnumerable method and the way to opt into this is with this "top-level values is true." Just super quick we did a bunch of work on compression.
I'm not going to go through all of these. Perhaps the biggest change is that Zstandard APIs are now integrated into the product, but we made improvements in several different places for several different algorithms. Yeah, this is all continues to be important.
I think I have a quick chart on this. Yes, so just for kicks, I compressed the system, I/O compression C# files, in the dotnet runtime repo. You can see I was trying to be a bit meta, and this is -- just a massive caveat. This is one example. This is only text. It's not it's not some other type of artifact and it's only one body of text
but I thought it was just interesting so I compressed with both the optimal setting but then
also a smaller size which is different than optimal. You can see for this particular body of text, brotli came out best with Zstandard being very, very close and quite competitive. I think it was like -- well, it doesn't matter how big, but I think it was like 15 megabytes.
No, it can't have been that much. I actually don't remember how large the source text was, but this was this was great, and you can now do this at home. Okay. Now we're going to switch gears a lot. I'm going to talk about two enormous runtime projects that we've been working on, so the first time is Runtime Async.
I'm going to give you a quick introduction first. I think everyone knows that Async code is pervasive in C#. It's pervasive in many languages. Runtime Async, you should think of it as a new optimization for Async Code. It's not some new model. There are no new keywords that you need to learn or anything like that. Yeah, no source changes required. It's really just a fast path that's decided at compile time when you compile your code with dotnet build.
Yeah, and it's completely compatible. You can enable Runtime Async. You can call old code. Old code can call new code. There's no compatibility break in any direction. The big takeaway is when you write new code -- and by "new code," I mean, when you enable Runtime Async, there's no state machines. We'll talk a little bit more about what that means. Opt-in for.NET 11, will likely be the default and the new normal in.NET 12. But again, even in.NET 12, you'll still be able to -- yeah, there's no compatibility break ever. Even when it's the default, you can still do whatever you wanted before. Okay.
The opt in is super easy. We have this features property. You just type "runtime-async equals on," and that's it. Just a quick way to think about this, so these names are not perfect, but these are the names we're using. One is we call Compiler Async, meaning that's the traditional model that, say, the C# compiler uses. The source compiler owns the state machine, so you have an async method that gets rewritten as a state machine. Then it has a certain set of mechanics, that I'm largely not going to get into, that are executed by nature of how this code is written. With Runtime Async, the code is not rewritten.
The state machine does not exist in your.dll or.exe that you generate. The runtime takes care of all of that, so we still have suspension and resumption. All of this machinery is owned by the runtime. We basically have many state machines that get boiled down to one runtime managed system. Just one, it's kind of a slight joke, is, like I said, Compiler Async is the language compiler model and Runtime Async is the new one. The thing is, is that it's almost all implemented in the JIT, which is itself a compiler, which we'll see a little bit more. They're both Compiler Async of a kind, but anyway, we're still using these names. I'm sure that served to just confuse people. In terms of the benefits, why did we do this project? So cleaner stack frames for -- largely for production diagnostics, there's a small win on size for the binaries.
A large portion of the motivation was perf. We think we can make Async Code faster, particularly when all the code is runtime async. Once people start adopting this, we'll encourage them to convert their whole stack to Runtime Async. All that means is just turn Runtime Async on for all your projects. Like I said, that'll eventually be default, and there's potential for Async code to actually improve over time without recompiling your code.
So imagine in the future you've got a bunch of -- you say you have your NuGet feed for you know your company's code and you upgrade.NET 13 and you haven't actually recompiled that code although it is using Runtime Async there could be improvements to the Async infrastructure within the runtime and then your code would just get faster because all that code is in the runtime and not in your library anymore. Okay.
Yeah, so here's a fun chart that I made. We turned on runtime async for the product in Preview 4. That's the one we released in May. That means it was not on in Preview 3, and so I went through the product and found some heavy hitters. You can see that the product basically got smaller in Preview 4, and that can be attributed largely to the removal of the state machines. These libraries all had state machines in them before and now they don't.
Here's a sample app. We're not going to go into detail on what it does but it's basically just trying -- it's got outer async middle async and inner async and it's just trying to create kind of interleaved nested async.
One bit of clarification is I intentionally used Task.CompletedTask, which is, obviously, not normally how you would write your code. The reason is, is I wanted the stack frames to just be purely about the Async machinery. I wanted it to not be about what the code is actually doing, so that you could just see the most-bare stack frames. Then one other piece of information that you need to know is that -- so inner async is obviously the most nested. In that one, we write, "Environment.StackTrace," so you can see the most nested. Then in middle async after an inner async is called, I throw an exception in. Just for some reason, I wanted them to be in different frames. Okay. Let's see what happens. In.NET 10, what we see is, yeah, the first part is the stack trace, and you immediately will see, oh, yeah, I see these state machines that Rich is talking about.
They're definitely there. It's kind of a bit messy, but this is -- it's also accurate. It's perfect fidelity of what your call stack looks like. Then you can see at the bottom we have Exception.ToString, and it's cleaned up. We had already cleaned this up. It's basically -- the distinction is
is that Exception.ToString is supposed to kind of deliver you the intent so that you can reason about what your app was actually doing but the stack trace like Environment.StackTrace is always intended to be perfectly accurate. Let's look at the.NET 11 example. Now you see that they're basically the same. Environment.StackTrace now is just as accurate as it was before, but those state machine frames are gone.
What I did on the next slide is I, basically, overlaid the two slides on one another. You can see the frames that have been removed. It's basically you have inner async. We then basically start the state machine. Then we come back into inner async. With these state machines, you come back multiple times if there were multiple awaits in it. Okay.
Now, let's -- all right. I want to talk about NativeAOT. The main point is that, yeah, NativeAOT works perfectly with this. NativeAOT doesn't really have a runtime, so it's just relying on NativeAOT users, RyuJIT, our JIT compiler as its code generator.
It just -- all of the system works perfectly well with NativeAOT. Basically, there's nothing to say here because the whole system works perfectly with AOT just because of the way our architecture works, so that's great. Now I want to talk about memory safety, so this is a massive project that we started. It's a two-release project, 11 and 12, to some degree, a bit like Runtime Async.
Although Runtime Async will actually be supported in.NET 11, just not enabled by default, but memory safety, it's in preview in.NET 11. Right now, we're defining a set of language changes. I actually wrote a blog post on this like a week or so ago. It goes into much more detail on what -- yeah, goes into much more detail. Yeah, so this release, we're defining a set of language changes. We're applying those changes to System.Private.CoreLib, which is the bottom-most managed library, and we're also making a bunch of changes so that ourselves and anyone else needs to use Unsafe less. We want to reduce the need for Unsafe. Then in.NET 12, we're basically just finishing everything off.
The takeaway, which the blog post gets into, is that we're redesigning the Unsafe keywords to mean a reviewable caller contract as opposed to establishing an Unsafe context. APIs like Unsafe and MemoryMarshal, they'll be marked with this contract, yeah, when we're done. There's a ton of work that's been going on to make certain patterns higher performance, and a lot of this has to do with bounds-check elimination or making inlining work better. These are cases where we and others would often write Unsafe code because the JIT wasn't able to quite do the right thing. In these cases, we're not doing the right thing, so I'll show you some examples.
I like this one so in the second line you see this check that's saying "only continue if I plus 2 is less than length." so that we know for sure that the next two indexes on the particular span will be safe. The JITs in.NET 10 and before it actually -- that check works correctly with I plus 2 because the check matches I plus 2 so we would only be able to reason about if the checks -- sorry
if the check and the index perfectly matched. It would actually still do a bounds check for I plus 1. Now it realizes that I plus 1 is within the range of the check as I plus 2, and so now this code gets faster.
The next one is very, very similar, except it's just -- the polarity of it changes a little bit, so this one, we're saying, basically, does the span go past the size of an int? Is it at least 4 bytes? Then you can see then we do this span.Slice that is the same size, but we're coming at it from the end. The JIT previously didn't work well with this tail slice pattern, so now it does. This is an inlining one. In the past, what would happen is GetLength would get inlined into the demo. Then we would have these two null checks on s, and they would both be run. In addition, the "throw new ArgumentNullException" that, sometimes, when you have an actual throw in the stack frame, and yes, then that can pessimize the code as well.
In this particular case, when we inline, we're only left with the s is null return minus 1, cleaner code, less code. This runs faster. Those are all cool, but they don't necessarily completely change the game, so we've kind of taken this work and applied it to SIMD.
SIMD stands for Single Instruction/Multiple Data, quote/unquote "vector instructions." These get used extremely pervasively across the product, and so it relies on a bunch of Unsafe code. If we could make SIMD memory safe, then we would just be removing a whole category of Unsafe code from the product, which would be excellent. We'll look at an example of what the code looks like today. I'm not going to go through this line by line. The takeaway is, okay, count the MemoryMarshals and Unsafe calls in this code block. You're, like, okay, yeah, it's probably not safe. Then in the code after, you can see that all those API calls are gone. The JIT is able to do the right thing, basically, in part, by relying on some of those changes that I showed you before. We can now deploy this code across the product, and it gets better. I hope you're installing.NET 11 previews, trying out some of these new features, giving us feedback on GitHub and on blog posts, so that we can ship the right thing.
Okay, awesome, Chet says yes.
Chet Husk: Yes, and definitely the feedback on the GitHub discussions and issues. The team is there. We look at those things all the time, and the earlier you all get hands on with these changes, the better they will be for the GA this fall.
Richard Lander: Absolutely, and for the features that we're not shipping until.NET 12 as well. Awesome. Thank you.
END
