Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: DEM302
All right. Thank you for your patience, everybody. This is our last demo in this theater. For tonight, we are going to talk about building and deploying an Azure App Agent, an Azure app with your agent team and the floor is yours, Don. No one.
It's not loud. Testing, testing, testing. Are we on? Are we on we're on we're on testing test there we go hey y'all how's it going today and today you ready to go anybody ready for the show after this chain smokers going to be awesome we're going to go long since we're in so we're going to take our time all right nobody's after us all right I'd like to introduce myself I'm Brady Gaster. I work at GitHub as of a couple weeks ago.
I'm really happy to be there like to say hi to everybody and I'll turn it over to Ron. Oh, I'm. Ron and I'm a PM at Microsoft and today we're excited to be here to do our demo session here. Our goal is to get into a live demo in the first minute, so let's get to it. So what are we going to do today is using the 25 minutes we have here to build a Zava customer Insights agent system together. So as Zava, this is an online retailer, we really care about customers. We want to take good care of our customer feedback and that's when we started building this agent to help us understand customer feedback and take actions on it. All right, let's get into this. I am going to do everything in VS Code.
By everything I really mean it. So you guys can tell me if I ever step out of VS Code? All right. So, oh, actually before I get to that, I should show you the end product that we are building here. OK, this is not obvious code, but this is a front end website that's connected to the agent in the back end that runs in Microsoft Foundry. So what this agent is doing, actually it's a team of agents here. It's is it's able to understand customer, customer feedback, analyze them and give us give us insights on customer sentiment. So for example, I have here, you know, customers is talking about price being reasonable, but delivery was slow. So this is kind of like a, a mixed feedback of positive and negative sentiment.
The second one is talking about app crashed which is obviously a negative feedback and the third one is my order arrived damaged very bad. So our agent was able to identify this being a negative feedback and not only it told us about this insight, it also took actions on them. It connected to the customers and orders information we have that lives in Microsoft Fabric data platform and connect that feedback to that specific customer
look up their orders and determined that we need to provide a free replacement for this customer. So it triggered a bunch of actions all on the on the on the agent side within this agent system by having multiple agents working together. So with that, let me get into VS Code and show you how we did it. So first of all, when Brady and I started working on this system, the first thing I did was went to VS Code and Copilot and that is literally the prompt I sent it. I said I wanted to build a production ready Foundry host agent named as using the Microsoft Agent Framework.
Very brief. So what I usually do is I will switch to this plan mode, right? So I want to get the agent to talk with me, copilot to discuss things with me, to have a plan laid out before it goes and implements things.
So that's a lot cheaper. So what I did was just basically to kick this off and I won't have time to show everything live. So I'm just going to show you the actual history I had from a week or so ago when I when I did this so exam, same prompt and the copilot try to make sense of this. And you know, Microsoft agent framework is really wonderful. This open source agent framework that helps you orchestrate multi agents. But it is very new and so is Microsoft Foundry service, which is also a new thing that we are building actively.
So Copilot needs to learn about all these things. When I said use Microsoft Agent Framework or Host Agent, it needs to learn about these new technologies. So what it did was it actually pulled up this Foundry skill that we ship with the Foundry Toolkit VS Code extension for the latest knowledge about the service, about the framework. Then it's able to understand how it will go about building this agent. So that was how I started the first I was just going to do sentiment analysis, which is very simple, send my agent, you know, piece of cosmic feedback.
It returns a score for negative or positive sentiment score. But then I figured why not build a multi agent system composing of multiple agents. And this is how we started iterating with Copilot and figure out this plan that included four different agents. So not only it's going to classify whether there's a negative or positive feedback, it's going to look up our data in the back end. This is what the second enrichment agent is going to do is it will look up, OK, which customer is this?
Is this AVIP customer, you know, what is the status of their order, what is happening there? So this is what's happening with the second agent. And a triage agent will then decide, you know, do I need to draft an e-mail to the customer? And then lastly, the aggregate agent is going to put everything together. So that's our agent system, a team of agents.
Then of course, Copilot scaffolded everything for me. I did not write a single line of code here, but I will show you real quick the code that Copilot generated. So first of all, as I mentioned, we're using the Microsoft Agent framework, so this is the important statement here. But I want to show you how we orchestrated these four different agents.
And literally this is the line of code that composes everything together. So I have 4 different agents, 4 lines of code here. And this is how this single line that says workflow that composes everything together, you can see I have conditions in there and different flows between different agents. That's all defined in this one function.
All right. So with that, I kind of have the the skeleton of my agent system. But remember for the second agent, which is enrichment, we wanted to look up our customer order and customer information that lives in Fabric. And this is what our data looks like.
Fabric is really wonderful. This is 1 platform where all of your data can live in. And just like you guys for Java, we also have data in here. Now the question comes in, if I have my agent running in Microsoft Foundry service, how do I connect back to the Fabric data? So this is when Foundry Tools and Toolbox comes in.
So I want to show you real quick how I set that up so in VS Code I am able to look at the toolbox I have defined. So toolbox is really just a way to package various tools into a single entity that you can interact with from your program. I really love that with toolbox you can have all sorts of different tools or packaging into one.
So in this case I have Azure AI Search which index over a product catalog and then I have the second one which is a Fabric IQ connector that links back to my customer and orders data. And with that I can access this toolbox via a unified endpoint. So just one endpoint and a unified authentication. So just connect once I'm able to connect to everything in this toolbox. So just to show you real quick, this is this line is how I can attach that toolbox I've defined to the enrichment agent and everything else. All other agents don't have that capability, but that one agent is able to access our internal data. So with that, let's run this agent. So remember, this is all happening locally.
My code is on my local disk. Of course, it's connecting to a Foundry model that's in the cloud. It's connecting to this toolbox, which is also part of the Foundry service. But my entire agent right now runs locally.
So what just happened here? This might be a new UI that we're looking at here. Let me kick this off and then I'll explain. Oh, I need to get my test data ready.
Test data. All right, so for now, I'm just going to send it in Jason format, really, really raw format, which Brady is going to connect to the to the app later. So this is tool, a tool called Agent Inspector that is part of the Foundry Toolkit VS Code extension.
It serves multiple purposes. First of all, as you see on the left hand side, it serves as a visualizer. If you have multiple agents in your workflow, it really helps you how things flow together. It's a little hard to see that in the code, but you can't visualize here. It is also a playground like I said, I showed you, I sent a play payload there. It's also of course just normal debugging just like how you would debug any other code in VS Code. I can hover over to see the variables.
I can see there are three items being sent in my payload and the two first two are classified as negative, the last one is positive. So you can you can expect like you normally do and then continue for this agent system to flow through. You can see this diagram is updated alive. So we actually get the object models from runtime to compose this, so you can follow how the workflow is executing. So remember the second agent is the one that has the ability to call Fabric to call Azure AI Search via that toolbox. So it is taking a bit of time.
I know things are working when it's taking a long time because it didn't fail right away. But I while that's going let me show you the other thing I love about this tool which is we actually capture the events from runtime so that you can inspect every single event that comes in and out of your agent.
So here you can see the input and output as I select different nodes in this diagram, this shifts. You can see this is what the enrichment agent takes in and this is what outputs. So let's look at the results here a little small. Let me Scroll down. So this is the overall sentiment and per item it figured out, you know, this is the the product that is used mentioned by the customer. And this is a draft e-mail coming from one of the agents in the system. All right, so that is all good. We tested with a simple payload with three, three items. It's fine as apoc as a prototype.
We know things are working. But if you want to put this into production, you might want to test this at scale, you know, perform more formal evaluations. So because I am just lazy and don't don't want to do all the work manually, I basically came here to copilot again. And all I said was this, add evaluations to my agent.
That's literally what I said. And because a copilot has access to my source code, right, it can't understand what my agent is trying to do, what it's taking as input, what it's outputting as the result. So it figured out everything for me, including a test data set, which I can show you here. It comes with 10 different roles.
These are kind of like like the different customer feedback that we're simulating through the system. It came up with different evaluators, all those suggested and implemented for me. And basically what I said is all looks good, just run it. And Copilot then took this and behind the scenes it's using the Foundry MCP server to submit this evaluation directly to the Foundry service. So now I have this up running against my agent and then I can view the end result directly here inside VS Code as well.
I can find the right window here. So here's my agent result coming back that I can view in VS Code. So last thing I want to show you real quick
if I hand off to Brady because I really need to show you my favorite feature in here before I leave VS Code so I can then you know everything we run up to this point is happening locally. Then I want to push things into the Foundry service to have my agent run as a host agent that is fully managed and observable and all that goodness. So I just did that by running this command here to say deployed hosted agent. And that's really all I do. There's a couple steps that you can follow to in this wizard to get you there. But once deployed, then I can come in here to the hosted agent. And just like the playground we have before, we have this playground that this time is actually talking with the service live. So I want to show you my favorite feature here real quick, which is this log streaming that we're getting back as the agent is running.
So this includes all the call stacks happening on the server side. And here here comes the magic is you can review this directly with with VS Code. The copilot, if I just click on that, it basically extracts the messages coming back from the service and send that to Copilot. And Copilot can, if there are errors, exceptions, issues, Copilot can fix there right there for you. OK. I think that wraps up all the agent piece and then we're going to put a front end. Cool.
Let's do it. We're going to cut the front end. And the other thing we're going to do is what you've seen from wrong today is that she's done everything inside of VS Code and I'm going to do everything inside of my beautifully customized for build in San Francisco version of Copilot. So you'll see here that I have an empty version of her repo. I've essentially just cloned her repo down to my computer. I forked it first and then I cloned it because otherwise it would be rude. So I've got her code on my machine now, and what I want to do is I want to throw a squad at it.
Does anybody other than that guy know what a squad is? OK, cool. All right. A squad is a tool that I developed with my friend Tamir is a multi agent framework for GitHub Copilot. It uses a lot of tokens because it's multiple agents talking at the same time but you get to the endpoint a little bit quicker than if you were kind of do a single threaded conversation directly with Copilot. I'm going to show you how to get started with it. So I'm in her repo. I could, you could do this in a brand new repo. You could do this in, you know, existing repo.
You could do brownfield or Greenfield. I'm going to do a lot of prompting here, so I want to go a little quick. I apologize, will have a little bit of a cooking show routine. So the first thing that I would do is I'm already inside of my repo. I'm going to type squad in it and I'm actually going to do the no workflows version of this because I'm not going to use workflows.
If you know, you know. So I'm going to hit enter and now I've got a bunch of files on disk. I'll show you what those files look like in a second, but it doesn't matter because all I want to do now is I want to go into copilot real quickly. And I'm going to go over here to my CHEAT SHEET because you got to have a CHEAT SHEET when you don't have long. And I've got a little prompt right up here that I'll drop in. So you can see here that what we want to do is we want to create a new squad. And I want to squad with descriptive names. And I didn't go into the agent Shoot, I forgot one step.
I forgot the steps. So I want to do this. I want to go into autopilot mode. And then I'm going to type agent and I'm going to say yes, I trust you, Brady and squad. There you go. I've selected the squad agent right here, that's a GitHub Copilot agent. And now I can hit the prompt. And what will happen right now is the GitHub Copilot is going to go out and it's going to look at my code. It's going to look at the prompt that I gave it, and it's going to go, I think you need this and this and this and this and this. And it's going to build me a team of agents that look like this. So this is what it looks like when it's done. It's just going to give me a series of agents.
And I didn't go with descriptive names on these. I went with cool names. So we've got a series of folks here who are, I always do that series of agents here who are going to do independent things.
Why would we want to do it that way? Because if you just send all the agents the same instructions, they're going to fight over work like Hungry Hungry Hippos. So the idea here is I love that you're nodding.
You're my biggest fan. I love it. The idea here is that each one of these agents know their job and they're only going to do their job and they're going to collaborate with other agents who do their job. So that's what it looks like once you get it. Now let me show you real quickly on the back end, if I were to do a quick search right here, MCP show server name. So you'll see here I've got a list of all my MCP tools, all my MCP servers.
I'm not zoomed in far enough. I'm going to click on this one and you'll see here. These are all of the Azure MCP tools that I get with the Azure MCP server that I just kind of dial into my CLI by default. So this is all the knowledge and all the different tools that I could need to do all the different Azure things and Foundry things because we put all the Foundry tools in there as well. Now, if I can exit out of that and I do one more of these things, I'll show you skills and I'll do skills list because I always forget.
There you go. So now you'll see a list of the different, oops, Azure skills that I have. Now, the idea behind these Azure skills, that's a series of markdown files that I have on disk that tell Copilot how to use all those MCP tools together the right way to get tasks done. So my squad and anything on my Copilot instance has access to all those tools and all those skills, so I can just talk to my squad in favorite language. And we can get off and running.
So the first thing I'll do real quickly and I'm going to do the cooking show routine on this. But I have done this a few times. As you can see, I've automated most of it. I've got this prompt here that basically says, so I have wrongs code. And what I want to do with this code is I want to provision a new instance in Azure Foundry. And the only thing I want you to do is to provision that instance in Azure Foundry. I've already written all of the infra for you.
And when I say written the infra for you, I didn't write that infra. Squad wrote that infra in the hotel room last night because I'm too lazy to do it myself. OK, and here's the funny part. I was deploying this thing to the wrong compute host. I was deploying it to container apps. She didn't proofread my work until last night, and then she looked at it.
She goes, that's the wrong endpoint. So I was like, Oh no, Squad, we have to change everything. Squad changed everything in about an hour.
Do you know how they did that? Using all those skills and those tools? They have all that stuff available to them and they work together and they figure out how to change everything around.
I was terrified. I've never used that service, so I thought, I'm never going to be able to get this to work. I was done in maybe 45 minutes. It's pretty cool. So and it's because of all these skills and these tools. So I would essentially go into my copilot instance right here. And this is the new one, right?
This is your fresh one. Yep, it is. I would go into here and I would just paste in that prompt and it's going to go off and it's going to start working.
Now we're kind of tied on time. So what I'll do is I'll flip over here and I'll show you what you would get. You know, I would not do a deployment to where she'd already done a deployment, but at this point, I would have my agent in the cloud.
I would have everything ready and I can actually hit that back in, but I don't have a front end on top of it yet, so I would need to do that front end as well. The way I would do that is just clearly with my second prompt and my second prompt right here basically says the back end is live and you've already got the front end React code again written by Squad because I have a React agent on the team because I'm a.net person and you know they've written the the front end for me and now I can deploy that as a second instance as a second container app. So that one they do basically is AZD. Now the fun part here was I do everything with AZD.
I'm in the CLI, I'm in VS Code when I want to edit my files, but I'm primarily in the CLI. I'm a copilot, you know, CLI user as well as a copilot app user because it's fantastic. So I'm rarely inside of VS Code. So what I needed to do was do everything with AZD. So I was like, can you deploy the service? Both the front end and the back end 100% use an AZD. And I'm sort of sad to say that they figured out that they couldn't. There's a couple of additional things that you need to do with the Foundry SDK and CLI.
And not only did they figure that out they figured out that they could do that as a post deployment hook using the existing AZD infrastructure and just did it O when I run that second command that you see U there what you end U getting deployed is that front end part which is going to is it going to crash now?
My browser's not going to work. There we go. So what you see now is that I would get this container app, this container app environment, this container registry, because I didn't need that before, and my Log Analytics workspace. Those are all dependencies of an Azure Container Apps environment. Those aren't necessarily things that wrongs code would need for the agent.
That's something my front end needs because it's the React front end that runs in Container Apps. Now I can click this thing and I can go right here to the front end and I can click on send feedback. And this was this was fun too. So Foundry not only is giving me the ability, this was a surprise for wrong. Not only am I using her Foundry instance with her model, this front end is calling that model to generate fake feedback. So this is an example where we can basically reuse that Foundry model instance across two different compute layers and two different compute hosts authenticated to one another using am I so you know
you're completely secure with those apps talking to each other. And I did the whole thing using prompts and Squad and the existing tools that I have directly installed into my CLI and that she has installed into her VS Code instance. So it's the same tool, CLI and everything else.
So that's kind of what almost the end. But what I wanted to show you the last piece of this is that when I do all these things, at the very end, I have a report. And in this report, this shows you.
Let me see if I can zoom in on it. This shows you everything that a squad agent did. So in this case
everything that they wrote everything that they deployed is why Python as well as all the tools that we used as we were doing all the different things as well as the different skills that we consulted. And I think we consulted more than this during development because I don't know how to use half this stuff. So I had to use those skills to actually lay down all the IAC. But this is an example of how you can not only do all the work, but you can have the squad document the work on the fly as your role.
So you can actually do this stuff as well. So without further ado, I do have one slide for you because we have to have our our call to action slide. I cannot believe we did this on time. I'm very proud of us both. Good work. Wrong.
So definitely take a look at the Foundry toolkit for VS Code as well as the Azure skills and the MCP tools directly for your copilot CLI install all of it. You need it all GitHub copilot. Obviously you want that the app as well. And then you want to try Squad.
Definitely try Squad. If you like it, if you hate it, if you want to leave comments or issues or pull requests, feel free. It will probably stay. It will always stay an open source project.
I just don't know if it's going to stay in some guy's organization. We're going to try to move it somewhere more efficient. So I don't know when that's going to happen. No ETA, but thank you all so much for giving us an opportunity to talk to you about agents today. Thank. You. Thank you very much everybody for joining us today.
Stop back tomorrow. We start up with a new series of demo sessions at 9:00 AM tomorrow and enjoy this evening's entertainment.
END
