Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: DEM361
Some good energy for the last day. Cool. So I'm Jim Bennett. I'm a Microsoft MVP for Foundry and dev tools and stuff like that. And I'm here to tell you about your agents. So quick question. Well, first of all, who's heard of AI? Yeah, OK, fair enough. But who is actually building agents?
OK, send a few hands. Who actually know what you what's actually knows what your agent is doing under the hood? Few hands, OK, who knows that their agent is actually working?
Few hands. OK, this is what we're going to talk talk about today about the fact that you probably don't know what your agent is actually doing under the hood. So let's get away from slides.
We don't care about slides. Let's see something in action. Now. Here I have an agent. Now all the cool kids tell me that agents are lit LLMS, instructions, tools, and that's literally what makes an agent. So I have an agent up here, this code here, this 11 lines of code. This is my agent.
That's all I have. I'm defining my LLM. I am using an open AI model. This is running on Microsoft Foundry. If you haven't heard of Foundry, it's basically a place to run your models, do cool stuff like that.
I have my instructions. This particular example, I have been building a procurement system evaluator. So kind of fairly boring line of business application that you're likely to build.
People want to buy stuff rather than having humans approve or deny. This is an agent that does that approve or deny cycle. So it's a procurement evaluator. You read purchase requests, gather relevant policy, vendor budget, blah, blah, blah, do stuff. OK, And then I have some tools. I have a series of tools I've got to check policy tool, a tool to look up vendors, budgets, that kind of stuff.
Now this is great. This is me kind of scaffolding my application, but I'm using agent framework. An agent framework kind of just does the rest for me. Literally the way that I interact with my agent is this one line of code. I say agent, run, here's the inputs, just go and do your thing. And then I get back an output and then, you know, fingers crossed it all works, but I don't really know what's going on. It's very much, this is a black box, this is decisions are being made under the hood. So the LLM decides, sorry for the anthropomorphisation there, but the LLM decides what tools to call, if it should call a tool, what order to call tools. And then the agent framework takes the results, those tool calls, calls the LLM again, does more things, does more things. And all I ever see is just the output coming out.
That's it. I don't get that visibility over what's happening under the hood and I just have to hope it works. I can run this in dev, fingers crossed it works. So this is the kind of thing that my agent would do. So I could say, look, I want to put in a purchase request, $3200 I want to spend on the engineering team for an IDE because we need an updated IDE. This goes in and the agent comes back and says, OK, this is approved, This is why it's approved.
Done. Sweet, complete black box. Could be right, could be wrong, I just don't know. So how do I discover what it's doing under the hood? Well, who's heard of open telemetry?
Yes, so a few of you. Open telemetry is a standard way of seeing what your applications are doing. You will bolt this onto your web app. You see how long the requests take.
You see your five hundreds, your four hundreds, your two hundreds. You get visibility over what your application is doing. Wouldn't it be nice if we could take that same principle, that same open standard principle and apply that to AI applications and you can.
So there is a thing called where are we open inference? Has anyone heard of open inference? OK, one hand, Open inference is an open standard extension for open telemetry that works with the semantic conventions for AI. So basically it makes AI work with open telemetry.
Now Open Infinity are working on a Gen. AI standard. It's in a committee, and we all know what committees are like. So maybe one day they will get the standard going
but until then open inference has been around for a few years and that is kind of an open standard that folks can use for gathering to empty data from LLMS. And actually if you were in the session yesterday from Sarah Bird you would know that open inference is the standard that's being used for the new assert framework and agent control specification that Microsoft are doing. So if I think if I want to put this kind of telemetry inside my application, it's actually not that complex to do it.
Open telemetry is a standard. We, the person over there has said I've done open telemetry has probably done this. You just drop in AI want to trace things. I put in a couple lines of code to say I want to trace this.
I want to send this to open inference and then I just send this to a back end and that can then it will exposes visibility of what my application is doing. So what I get out the other side is something like this. So what I've got here, this is an application called Phoenix. It's a free open source back end for telemetry data made by Arise defaults invented open inference.
This is kind of the standard default out the box open source way of rendering open inference data. And this gives me a complete breakdown of what my agent is doing. So at the top level, I have this process dot run and it says this is the tech flow IDE $3200 need the upgrade and they have the response.
Yes, it's compliant. It's whatever. This this is really what I see from my agent run, but I have so much more information now. I have this tree diagram that shows me everything the agent is actually doing. So actually Microsoft agent framework kicks off an agent. It then calls an LLM. This LM, I can, I can see the system prompt, I can see the user prompt, I can see what comes out the other side request to do tool calls. I can dig deep into a whole of more attributes.
Where's the fun ones? So I can see things like token counts in and outs. It's open AI. We use a Microsoft agent framework and I've kind of got this deep level of telemetry across everything that the agent framework is is deciding to do everything that goes into every single part of the system. This is what goes to the LM. This is what comes back from the LM.
The LM wants to call a tool, sweet. It calls the Czech policy tool 3200 Tech flow gets back a response and so on and so on and so on. So I can start getting this visibility over everything that my application is doing at a very, very granular level. And this allows me to start understanding my application. I can start doing this at scale.
I can do this for in dev for one or two as I'm experimenting, I can do this in production for thousands, millions of rows of data. I get to see all the things and what's called as well because it's a standard open telemetry, I can do all the standard tricks that folks do. If I want to strip out PII or a customer data, I can drop a new spam processor in to strip it out. You know, anything I kind of want to do to manipulate the data on the way out, I can do that as well. So suddenly I know what my system is doing.
That answers that first question I asked you. Do you know what your agent is doing? I can see inside that black box. But the next question that comes up is, is it working? How do we know if something works? How do we know if an AI agent is working? Now who writes unit tests? Who writes? I'm not seeing enough hands here.
I'm not mad, I'm just disappointed. Come on. Now when we think about unit testing with deterministic code, we are used to writing tests. We say with these inputs
I expect this output that doesn't work with an LLM with these inputs I will get a non deterministic output coming out the other side. So how do I know if my LLM is working? Well, the easiest way to do it is ask a person to have a look humans can look at. But it turns out that actually humans are not the best at evaluating whether something works or not AI is actually better than humans at doing this for the simple reason that humans get bored.
So who here likes having lunch? Who here is doing work the last 10 minutes before lunch and just wants to get it wrapped up as quick as possible so they can go and have lunch? Yes, humans make mistakes. Humans have biases. Humans, it's been shown. Like for example, in the prison system, if your parole review is just before lunch, you've got no chance.
After lunch, you're sweet, you're out of there. So there's these kind of biases that happen because humans get bored. Humans make mistakes. AI is just as good as a human still makes mistakes but doesn't get bored. And we can run AI at scale to test whether or not our code is working. So what I can do is I can actually use an AI to see is my system working. Classic example here is I have these tools that do things. What if the tool didn't work? What if the policy tool didn't return a policy? Returned blank and my agent being really helpful goes, well, there's no policy, it must be fine.
Approved. You can all buy $1,000,000 worth of software. Yay. All approved because there is no policy.
How can I test for this? How can I discover this? So actually what I can do now that I have this visibility over everything that happens inside my system I can take this data and I can actually throw this at an AI and say is this good?
Does it work? Is it actually doing what it's supposed to do? And this is what we call evals. So evals is the fancy AI word for testing. We should have called it testing because people know what testing is, but we have to call it evals because we're cool and different. So whenever you hear the people talking about evals, it's basically testing for AI.
And So what I can do is I can start writing, got a prompt here. I can write, start writing a prompt to say, look at the information that I have and tell me whether or not my AI is working. So here I've got a prompt. You are auditing an automated procurement evaluator.
Each row shows a purchase request. The final produces blah, blah, blah. Decide whether the recommendation is supported by the tool evidence alone. So we're saying the data that comes back from the tools is the decision grounded in that data. I then have a rubric here for how we score it, approve, reject, flag for review. And then I have spaces where I can fill in the original purchase request
the evidence the data that comes back from the tools what the agent said why the agent said it. And then the final thing is the recommendation supported by tools supported unsupported return One word and I've now built a test. I have taken my non deterministic output of my AI, put this eval on top of it and this will now give me a deterministic output of supported or unsupported. This is great. I can start testing things and the way I can run this is I can literally go to Phoenix
download the telemetry data pass through it pull out the tool outputs throw it into this prompt throw it in an AI and say test it. And what comes out I'm going to flip to a different project in Phoenix that's easy to see. This what comes out is a score zero if it doesn't work one for it does. So if I look at this first one here, for example, let's actually go and open up in a trace.
First one here, right? So this one here, this says it's supported. The evidence shows sufficient budget. The vendors preferred the the purchase amount is under the auto approval threshold.
Done. So this is said the data that comes back from the tools allows agrees with the decision that was made. Cool. But actually, if I look at the all my numbers, pass, pass, pass, pass, pass fail, fail, fail, fail, fail. So it only works half the time. Half the time my agent is not actually working. It's not doing something grounded in the data from the tools. So if I have a look at say this row here, this says it's unsupported and it tells me that there's sufficient budget.
The policy requires VP approval for this level and this got rejected, but it shouldn't have been rejected. It should be flagged for VP review. So the policy says VP has to review this. The agent said rejected.
What it should have done is flagged it for review because the policy says somebody should review this. So having this LLM as a judge, I can see exactly what is happening, what's going wrong, what mistakes it's making. And so now I've got this great situation where I know what it's doing. I have my inputs, I have my tests, and I have some results. And when I have inputs and tests, I can start building automated testing around this.
I can start saying, right, this doesn't work. Now I can extract all this data that I've got all these inputs, and I can put this in like a data set somewhere. And then I can run these inputs through my agents score it with my evaluator
see what the score is and then I can start making fixes to my agents and put it through that same pipeline the same as those of you who put your hands up to say they do unit testing
probably have done. If you do test driven development, you build your tests upfront and you keep running your codes, it all goes green. Same kind of idea. I've got my data, I've got my evaluator. I can just keep tweaking my agent till the numbers come out good on the other side. So the, the classic example for this is model selection. My application is not good. I might try a new model, or my application is good, but I want to upgrade my model.
I want to try a cheaper model. The model providers pushed out a new model. How do I make sure my application still works and model changes? And so I've got an example here. This here is exactly the same application, the same agent. Nothing has changed, except I'm running this against GBT 5.4 instead of 4.1.
Oh look, look at all those ones there. This is now 90% effective. I've made no change to my application. All I've done is change the model that I'm calling. But because I've got this ability to have this data set, have these evaluations and run this continuous testing loop, I can score this.
I can tell when things are working or when things have broken. Now this I can then take a little bit further. So who uses a coding agent?
Few hands. OK, get up, copilot and he clawed people in the room. It's OK, Microsoft won't shoot you.
You know, he's fine now. So if you've got a coding agent, coding agents can have skills, Skills can access this data. So I can literally spin up GitHub Copilot CLI or Claude and say, OK, here's my code.
Here's the GitHub repo with my code in it. Here is the inputs that I run to my agent. Here are the evaluations that I run.
I want you to fix my application. And so the coding agent can take all this data. It can spin up my application in a sandboxed environment. It can pump my inputs in, it can run my evaluations. It can look at the results. And then it can go back and tweak the prompt change the model
adjust the tool descriptions whatever it needs to do and then run it again and then run it again. And slowly it can converge on a much better solution. Yeah, in this case, I went from 50% to 90% just by me changing the model.
That's very much a contrived case in a lot of situations. You need to get an iterate on the prompt, you need to iterate on tool descriptions, try different models, whatever you want to do. And eventually you'll find over like 456 cycles your coding agent will kind of converge on a point where you're kind of hitting that 90% effective rate for your agents. Top tip agents will never be 100%. Humans are never 100%, agents will never be 100%, but you want to kind of work towards this 90%. And so suddenly I've got everything I need to build that self improving software loop. Anyone here does self improving software? Anyone here use the agents to fix Got a hand over there yes, that's a couple of hands. This is kind of the future. We have the ability to monitor applications.
We can see what's going wrong. We can ask our coding agents to fix that. This is kind of the future of the software that we're building. So that is Skip for those we didn't do slides.
We just, So what have we talked about today? When you have an agent, it's a black box, you do not know what it's doing. You need to add observability so you can see what it's doing.
There's industry stands, this open inference is the industry standard for doing this. This gives you the view on what you're doing. Then once you've got this, you can start building evals.
You're using LM as a judge to test your agent runs, see what it's doing, and then you can use this data to drive that self improving software loop. You deploy your models to foundry, you build a Microsoft agent framework application. You can get up copilot CLI.
You can say fix it goes off fixes it. Jobs are good. And there we go. That is how you can use evals to understand your application. So I'm Jim Bennett, so I'm Microsoft MVP. If you've got any questions about this scan that that's got links to all my LinkedIn and so if you want to hit me up with any questions after this more than happy to geek out on things amazing. Once you scan that one, if you want to get started with Phoenix, it's free open source.
It's just a bit off the screen. It's free and open source. So scan that QR code and you can grab Phoenix.
You can run it completely locally. You can I would have, I would have showed it to you deployed to container App, but my Microsoft MVP Azure credit ran out three hours ago. So literally I have no Azure credits to show off on Azure, but that's how you can get started on there. And then finally, if you want the code for this up here in this GitHub repos all the code so you can reproduce everything that happened today. And if you got any questions, come find me afterwards.
Happy to answer your questions.
END
