Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: DEMSP381
Thanks for joining everybody. We had some tech difficulties back on track. So thanks for coming to our session scaling identity Ki cost effectively on Azure VMS. I'll do a quick intro Samir Nori, I'm in the software and ecosystem team at ARM work closely with different Microsoft and Azure teams. So our agenda is we'll talk quickly about the partnerships, our software ecosystem. You heard this morning in the keynote about Cobalt 200 VMS being in preview Goa from Microsoft will step through that.
And then Pranay is going to, you know, you know, walk through a demo here. So just a quick intro. And from an ARM perspective, for those who aren't familiar, you know, companies been around 30 years, we've shipped close to 350 billion chips over that time span from a, you know, company perspective. And our platform really is the computing platform for all devices.
And you know, from cloud to edge, right? In this context, today we're here talking about, you know, data center and cloud and our partnership with Microsoft and Azure. And we have a strong developer community. You know, as you can see, our partnership and collaboration with Microsoft really hinges on 2 pillars it's on. One is the silicon innovation, silicon innovation pillar. And we work with, you know, the Microsoft hardware and systems teams on deploying and designing and developing, you know, the cobalt ship.
There's two generations, the prior generation started off with, you know better price performance about 50% than the prior Gen. and Cobalt 200 now is about 50% better than, you know Cobalt 100 and Gobalt share some stats on in terms of the different workloads and benchmarks that you know we have so far. And then there's software enablement, right. So when it comes to software enablement, we have about 22 million developers an arm. We've been building this ecosystem for about 15 years and 95% of CNCF projects, you know, support ARM at this point.
So across the different flavors and categories you can see we work with a variety and most of the different open source packages as well as ISV you know
software packages that are enabled and supported on ARM across Linux operating system cloud native. So the CNCF Foundation, AIML and variety of different SAS and enterprise packages that you know run on ARM. So hopefully that gives you a flavor for, you know, the wide software support that's available. With that, I will turn it over to Goa to get into some details on Cobalt 200.
Take it away. Hey everyone. I'm Goa. I'm from the ARM product team at Microsoft. I'm very excited to talk to you today about the Cobalt 200 VMS. But before that, let's see what a success story looks like for Cobalt 100.
We launched Cobalt 102 years ago in 2024 and since then the response has been tremendous. We have several customers on enterprise side and the cloud native side that are interested in onboarding or have already onboarded onto our VMS and are experiencing very very nice price performance benefits that ARM has to offer. And not just the third party customers we also have the first party customers
the ones that you can look here like for example Microsoft Teams is running on Azure Cobalt 100 and we have Defender which says Cobalt is their default processor to to drive all their workloads. So such testaments come from the fact that our price performance is immense and unmatched compared to other offerings.
Now that that was about Cobalt 100, that's yesterday's story. Now today Satya announced Cobalt 200 VMS and Cobalt 200 and 100 of course are processors that are in house built which means they are custom built purpose built for service service space by Microsoft which is optimized for Microsoft's first party workloads and a variety of third party workloads. And Cobalt 200 VMS come innately supported with Azure Boost.
And as Samir mentioned the VMS the per core VM performance is at least 50% better than the previous generation Cobalt 200 VMS are Cobalt 200 processor is built on a three nanometer technology on latest ARM architecture. Now let's talk about the VMS. We know the processor is immense and has tremendous per core benefits, right? So we want to translate all those benefits to our customers in terms of virtual machines. So we not only offer the D and the DP and the ECDS as per what 100 but we extended that to the memory optimized version wherein every core gets about 16 gigabytes of memory and the local local storage
dense local storage optimized LCDS VMS for agent AI and cloud native workloads. So overall with all of these different VM offerings, we will be able to fit any, any workload that you know, an enterprise customer or a cloud native customer can imagine. This is something that's more relevant for developers, right? So what you see here are the benchmarks that we've tested on our VMS. So the on the left side you have the industry benchmarks the spec and rate where you can see the comparisons across the board are compared to the previous generation workloads on a per CP
per vcpu performance basis. So the industry benchmarks and the Microsoft benchmarks along with the Microsoft products all speak the same story that we are much better delivering very high performance compared to our previous generation. Microsoft products themselves are a testament to that. And we run our own first party workloads in, in, in in addition to referring to our 3P customers. Lastly, before I hand over to Renee, I want to talk about what is what is in store for the future, right? The future is about agentic AI. So on the agentic AI front
we see that Cobalt 1 Cobalt 200 is well suited as it is suited in the cloud native space be it sandbox creation be it creating a request and doing the entire loop be be it fitting as many sandbox agents into AVM Co.
Cobalt 200 excels in all of these fronts and will, will will provide unmatched price performance benefits. And with that I we have the regions we we currently have previewed in eight regions but we are going to expand those regions at GA And if you have further questions
I'll hang around but I'll pass it over to Pranay for an exciting demo. Thank you. Thanks, I'm.
Going to sit down? Just a quick show of times. How many of? You are familiar with, so I'll start there. So what we are doing here, So what we are showing is a transition aren't as a company and an architecture like something in Goa laid out how we transition or we launch the series for about 100 VMS. So if you look at cloud native applications or new additional applications, they had some bit. Fixed work. Flows. You get to from point A to point B, Execute a few tasks and you are done. What now we are seeing as an industry is essentially the applications moving towards an AI first AI data or an agentic workflow in built applications where you can essentially take your applications and move them over to add that agentic capabilities. Now what's happening here is essentially in with Cobalt VMS.
They support both those families. Essentially. With 100 and with two. 100 CPS VMS. That go and might talk about we have these different workloads supported on these different families so when you. Think about.
Distributed microservices architecture, meaning your application is spanned across hundreds of nodes and how you scale that application. All of that gets converted or covered when you run this application on Cobalt DS. For a demo that was a primer. What we are giving here today is showing a cloud native application that's running on the. If you look at some business line if you look at the first column which runs a polyglot microservices based application it's a shopping cart essentially application where you have all of your microservices running on 4.100 MPs. In the second. On the orchestration. We are running it on the new work about 200 mills which are much more capable to execute on. CPU Inferences.
Without need for any other external teams and whatnot, and. The thought. Is where we are essentially provisioning multiple ports to solve those instances. Requests. Generated by the application.
One thing all of this is. Happening and. Inside that cluster. So your data is not going outside, you're not talking to a third party LLM, and everything is local.
And driving. And the second here are running on the newest 242 years that you heard about it. You know the application is a shopping meeting container application. All of this and Infinity is running inside the EPS customer. What you see here is what I'm going to do again. So if you see here all the.
Boats are. The Grammy on is 200 processes by V7 is 200 processes and this has a minister which mix for both 100 and 200. What we are showing here is. That shopping. Application that's entirely on this cluster and it's running across all these different things, right. So what I'm doing here you add application can run that your existing application you can add AI native equations including inferencing and within the cluster itself. So what you see here is that the application that's employed from our AI and now when you go down and what I've done here is having an orchestrated as a family of ages that's managing lives everything in CPU. And so all of these will be able to execute within the trusted all local now. None. What's happening?
And I'm trying to get in shape right. So what I do is I'm using this chat interface. I'm going to use this chat interface to see from where I want to camping here. But I can give some limits and some categories that exact items I want from the entire website I don't want.
I think it's only under $2000 but GCB under $2000 will be exactly 11. Cash back 199 and make sure that the budget is $2000. What's happening here is it's still give me 7 cash. It gives me $1200 worth. Taken from here.
I still have around 700. Now that you see there's a rocket state of service that's running. It's routing that traffic to a shopping agent, which is scanning table, adding, finding those projects, budgeting, which is cutting into the budget and enabling the agent. But essentially it's using the list of items that are different to the budget. Now I need some shoes.
I need some shoes. So I will add it. You can see I was doing A and now if I see you so look at it, what happened?
It did not give me a list of shoes because it's one that was ability that simply my needs. And now I do just Add all of these and it should show up on my card. So what happened here is it maintained that context. So the context was carried over because we are using the KB cache.
The context was not, it did not go and do back and forth. So we see it on the view and because if you see all those items are added to the again. Adding. The card and this is. Part of. It but what we do need to focus is all of this inferencing and these capabilities within all the CPU and in a local inferencing LLM. I'm using all 5 core. Mini model and in phonics runtime to interface with it and essentially.
Works on CPU. Inside the APS trust, that's it and maybe going on the side. Yeah, these are some labs. We had a lab.
We are doing a lab at. 6/30 9:00 and 3:00 tomorrow sign up for the lab. If you want to talk to us and you want to do more about the demos, this thumb up and you can all do it by yourself. So we'll, we'll talk to you all the different part during the labs. And lastly we have this program called ARM Cloud. Migration where we. Help our customers and partners. In their. Migration journey to R64.
So in case you have this starting your journey or if you are already well ahead and you want to do some performance analysis on CPU, we are there to help this. Reach out to us with this migrate and we'll be happy. What we'll get is the migration resources and CP to help with your migrations.
You'll also get engineering expertise for experts with that. Thank you so much for coming. Thank you.
END
