Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: DEM304
Yeah.
Lower is yours, it is ours. It is ours OK, but the timer is going. The time is going OK. Matt Torgeson here, lead designer of C#.
And I'm Dustin Campbell. I'm an engineer also on the C# team. And we do C#. We do C#. And today we'll talk about just one tiny little feature that we're adding to C# called Unions. Union Types. C# 15.
C# 15, it's coming out November. Stuff is already in preview. We can talk a little bit at at the end about how to try it. Unions is a thing that other languages have. TypeScript has unions. Most functional programming languages have some sort of discriminated unions, and they're all different. And we're now adding unions to C# and they're different again. They're our own little we call it Goldilocks, but you can also call it compromise version of it. So if you know unions already, this will be different. If you don't, you don't have to worry about it because we're just going to show you how unions should be.
And as this is a demo session, there's your slide moving over to demo. OK, so we have code here, right? And it's a, it's some modern C# code with top level statements. And what it is, we've got a series of records down here. Well, not all records, just a bunch of types that represent pets or animals, right? Animals like animals. And let's imagine they're not really here like in the real world scenario. They're just types all around.
There's a dog library. There's a cat library. Yeah, but they don't talk to each other because dog and cat people and yeah. And we want to talk about pets. Pets, right? So up here we have if we want to talk about pets, we have to they don't really have anything in common these types, right? So the best we can do is go all the way to the top and go, well, we have to treat them all as object, right? So we have a list of object of pets, right? And then we for each over these pets we produce it as we got a switch expression over each pet to kind of deconstruct those values out and turn them into a description. And then we write to the console, OK, and this will in fact demonstrate that there are 4 pets in this. Right, the four somethings. Yeah, and one of them is not what I would consider a pet. OK, we're in San Francisco, so hey, to each his own. But maybe sharks or pets here in San?
Francisco not with that many teeth, but yeah, so we have in here, we have a shark as well. And so they there's no type safety, right? You want a certain set of types but there's no way to protect against the other ones either in when you're constructing that list or when we're switching against them after. And you can actually also see there's a little squiggle on the switch there saying and you are not checking all the other things an object could be
You're not checking for crocodiles and so on. Go down the list. Yeah, I mean all the other natural pets like crocodiles and snails. So there's really, yeah, Keep, Yeah, like we only have 25 minutes, I guess. But yeah, so, so this is not great, but this is sort of the best we can do in C# up until now. Yeah. But wouldn't it be nice if even they even though these types were not created in a context where there was a notion of pet
why can't we create a notion of pet that they can belong to? And that's what union types are in C#. Right. And so we create them with just typing union and then we can say we're creating a union of pets and I can just put the different types that make up that set of that thing
that set of types that is pet. OK. And it's that simple, right? Then I can take pet and I don't have to talk to these as object anymore. I can say, well, no, this is a list of pet. And now we get an error because shark not a pet shark saying and.
It says, if you look at the error there, it says cannot implicitly convert type shark to pet. So that's good. But and that says something important and we can, it means we should go and delete that line. But what it also says is that you can implicitly convert the other types to heads.
So one of the things that a union type apparently can do in C# is you can convert from the case types the things in the list down there to the union type. That makes sense, right?
So OK, implicit conversions, right? Check. And then as we come down, we're doing our pattern matching here. It's our switch expression. And then and then, you know, decomposing each of these shark again has the error. Hey, look, it can't you know, expression of type pet cannot be handled by a pattern of type shark. It. Yeah, not a pet. Doesn't.
Match so we can take rid of this. But what's really cool here is that warning that was on the switch that said that it was not, could not be proven to be exhaustive. It is now we've covered all the cases, right?
Everything that's a pet is covered by the switch. And we now get compiler support. We get compiler help to let us know that yes, we have correctly handled everything. Yeah, and to prove the point, let's comment out one of the actual case types.
Yeah, we get that back. Right, so you get the warning back. So it's really helping you make sure you hit all the cases and nothing but the cases. That's part of the strong typing you get here. Yeah.
And it's smart, right? Like you could actually have like we could say pet is actually a union of dog and cat and maybe a bird, right? So you could say it's like a nullable bird.
And now again, the warnings back because now that null should be handled as well as one of the possible cases. So it's now not exhaustive. So it's very smart around these kinds of things.
It's cool. That's the feature. Yeah.
Thank you very much and have a good have a good conference. It is. It's the feature. So, so, so far is this.
Do you like it? It's OK, yeah. Some nodding. OK. Yeah, yeah, I guess.
Smiling. Yeah. OK. Thank you.
I, I we should do more crowd. Work I feel like one of the things we get we get a lot of feedback that we always do these demos that are like a a domain of like something like not really like the code you're trying to write. Like we're always doing person and student and here we're doing pets and dogs and cats and birds. We should probably try something that is more in that domain. Let's do.
The Let's Show Do we want to show members on? Oh yeah. We should do that first. Actually, I want to do show one more thing here now before we dig into that union itself. Like it's a very, very short description, but of course, you know, you could actually write a class or instruct that way.
It's just not very useful. What we usually do, right is we put braces on it and then you declare members, right? So we can declare a member in here. We can actually declare this whole description thing. This whole description calculation could just copy down here and we could say, well, let's make this like a public property, strict, not strict.
We don't even. That's C#. We don't even have. That in that world, yeah. And we can make it like, you know, a calculated property. But I can't switch on pet anymore. I mean, I have to switch on this.
What kind of pet is this right now? So now I can switch on that and then we can come up here and we can just get rid of that. Yeah, just say pet the description. Yeah. So, so you can add your own function members to it that compute stuff or whatever. We we do draw a line at things that introduce more state because we think you should think of it as the state of this thing is just the actual dog or cattle bird that's inside it shouldn't have additional state right that. So we we prevent you from that.
But as long as it's just a function member, a computer property, method, whatever, whatever static members you want, that's totally fine. So you can still do abstraction here and and the kind some of the common things you want to do across the types in this concept you just created implement them there. OK, so that's that's how that's pretty much how I think most people will use the feature. I hope so.
I hope this is useful. Yeah. Because it is really great for collecting together these things.
And I was kind of alluding trying to head there just a second ago. Yeah, right. I'd like, we'd like to just show you again, but like kind of in a in a domain that's like closer to what? Like maybe you might be using this in normal code that isn't all about cats and dogs. That is about in fact one of the things that almost everyone who asked us to add unions to C# been asking about, specifically at the. Scenario. So let's go there. What you see here is like.
This is nothing right now, sorry. You want to go back? No. And it's good.
It's good. OK, let's start over. So let's do another, let's do a slightly different kind of union scenario here. Yeah. So stuff on the wire, you get something back on the wire, either there's something or maybe you get an error, right so.
There's like you get like a success, right? You get back, you're going to model that data as like you get a success and that could be like anything in there. Yeah, it has some kind of payload. So put in like, yeah, data T, yeah, make that generic. That's what you want, that's what you want. What you get is. Yeah, and and an error. And then you want an error or you get an error.
So you need to model this as well, right? So we'd say it could be one of these two things, right? And then we can come in here.
Yeah, these are just records that are in the language today, right? Yeah, you can just write these already. These are not new features.
These are old features that you're not using yet. It's fine, but with unions now I can bring these together and connect them, kind of glue them together. So the compiler knows if these are related things, right? And I can use those generics within it, right? So I can say, you know, let's say we'll call this like result, OK. And that has two cases, right?
It has success of T and it has error and now I could have a method that returns result of T and it can return one of these two things. Yeah, you. Make it sound so cool I.
I do try to make it sound cool, actually. Let's put together some data that we can kind of model this. Like I'm getting stuff off the wire, right? So we'll say like, we'll make a queue of of like results of say like like we're getting ints off the wire.
Yeah, we're not heading totally into like realistic scenario territory here. We still got to have ints inside. But like it's the stuff where we're like well let's in queue a couple of things that come from like you know the data we'll say we we want to get a
let's get a success say like yeah
42's returned that'd be successful. And then like a new error like the error that I couldn't type, nothing happened. That's a good error. Yeah, sorry. Yeah. OK. So we've got some results and then we went to like loop over these results. So I could like do a while loop and you know in there we could try and dequeue and grab out the result and then come down in here.
And do a switch. Again and do a switch to get that data out. So switching on result. So say switch and what's the first switch going to be? It's going to be a.
Success, right? Yeah. So assuming it's a success of int of int. But now we can deconstruct it.
Because it's a record, yeah. Which is. That's why you should use records. See. You can deconstruct the data right out of it. Yeah, and. I can just pull out the D, right?
Pull out that data and then down here we're going. To do notice. Yeah. Oh, and now I have the. Switch on the switch. Because I haven't.
You haven't. Dealt with the errors. So it's reminding us to deal with the errors, which is what you've always wanted, right? Yeah. OK, so let's go ahead and do that. We'll grab out that message and you know, we'll just throw it.
Throw it, fine, bad things happen. Sorry. And I think that's what do we want to do. No, we should write it. We should write the like, you know, do. It like write it and.
Then we should run it. OK, let's make sure Dustin typed everything right. There you go.
Gets 42, throws the exception. And so, yeah, we're really in the business. It's funny, right? We're in the business of giving you more errors and you and you love us for giving us more, for giving you more errors, right. It's like because you're getting a a tighter control of your scenario here again. Yeah, One thing I so now you've seen this union type can be generic. They can so we they can have members, they can be generic. They can do most things that other types can do.
The the case types themselves can be most things as long as they can, as long as they convert to object, they can be case types. It's fine if they overlap or whatever. There's no like restrictions on that. They can be interfaces or type parameters or whatever. So it's a pretty general feature.
But I wanted I want you just to call out this scenario is subtly different than the one we had before in that it's not working on existing types that were already in the system. It's not trying to bring stuff together that others declared it. We are declaring the case types afresh here together with the union type and that is sort of like that's the kind of usage that functional people would call discriminated unions that we're essentially emulating that here where you are where the you are modeling the whole package so to speak. You're modeling the kinds of thing, things it can be and the union saying that it can be those kinds together. And and I think that's going to be a common pattern of usage as well. Yeah, well, and one thing that stuck with me.
So I love this. I think it's cool. I think I will find it useful.
OK, but how is the sausage made? Yeah, what's under the hood, Right. What's actually happening here? Because it seems like, I mean, if you work with T sharp type systems, this feels kind of magical in a way. If you've ever tried to write this sort of thing, it requires a lot of boilerplate. So what are we doing here?
It's actually. So it's actually in some ways fairly simple. Well, then the feature is there's a whole like language feature on top. But you, if you're wondering what's underneath, what is that union actually in terms that you you already have today. We can actually show you. We can, we can comment that out and we can write it in a long form instead.
That actually also works. Yeah, because unions, under the hood, there's they're they're structs. When we create them, we give you kind of a, a very, very like like prescriptive form, very opinionated form of what a union should be. When we produce 1 and what that prescription is, it's like we're going to create a struct, right? And that struct, what's that? Yeah, we want to tell the compiler so. So what are we saying here is you can build your own union types that are different from what we produce from the syntax. And it's just, it just takes a little more work, but not that much. So we're going to use that little more work to actually produce exactly the same thing.
But you could have done made different choices. You have to tell the compiler, hey, I know this is just a struct or a class or whatever, but I mean for it to be a union. So we do that by putting an attribute on it. It's really complicated attribute. It's already in.net 11 Preview 4. There is a union attribute that makes us work with five errors.
Actually more than that, there's more. There's two errors on the spot. And these are just errors. The compilers giving you to say like this doesn't work, right?
Because you're saying this is a result, but nothing connects success and error with this any anymore because we've commented that down below. So we need to do that, right? First of all, the very bottom warning or error says, hey, a union member like it must have have a public instance, right? Like if if this is a, this is a union, it must have a public instance value property of type object. And that's actually something that I didn't poke into up here but when we just had the union earlier if I dotted into that you'd see that value property
right? So we need to have one too. And it looks really complicated.
No. It's like that. OK, and that gets rid of one of those errors.
So that's just a oh, and you're hiding it right now I'm hiding it. But that's just an auto property. It's just it has a field behind it of type object that contains whatever it is that this union actually is now wrapped in this struct. But let's get rid of these other errors up here. Yeah, let's start. How would it connect success and error? Well, it says it needs at least one union creation member.
How do you create things? Constructors. Constructors. Right. So we'll add a constructor to this type that takes first one will take a success of int. We'll call that parameter, we'll call it value. And then we'll just kind of assign the, we'll assign the big value property to the little value down there.
And if you look, you see that the success errors went away, Yes. And now we just have one on. Error and the error on the result went away as well because now it does have one case type. So now it's a union of one thing. And we just need to add the other, right? Just another constructive for each case type. Yeah. And so we'll just add. Error in here and. Now we have a Union.
You need to go now. We've constructed everything the compiler is going to look for in treating this as a union. Yeah, we do add one more thing when we generate from the syntax, which is it implements an interface called I union. It's also already in.net 11. And which just says it has the value property that's.
All it does is all it does is have the value property. So if you want to check for unions or you know to do a runtime check and call that and and some just like generic runtime code you can so. Yeah, but so why are we doing this?
Why are we letting you do it this way as well? It is so that you can make other implementation choices for your union. If you don't like our our default that our syntax generates that takes whatever case types and boxes them into an object field and so on then they're kind of two major reasons why you might want a different implementation.
1 is you are like really performance, you know, in a very sort of tight loop or whatever, really performance aware. And you have you want a union of two little value types and you don't like that they get boxed every time you create a union value from that's an allocation that's expensive whatever. Well, choose your own form of storage.
Like have a field of the one type of field of the other type and a third field that says which one of them that is inside. And you can avoid the boxing. And there are extra things we're not going to show you. You can have the compiler generate different code and usage that also avoids the box. So the ways that you can make it non boxing at at significant expense like it's going to be more complicated from a like a developer point of view. But if you want to save, save those extra allocations or whatever, that's a way to do it.
And Copilot's going to write that part anyway, so that's fine. Yeah, right. As long as you all teach it.
Yeah, it'll be fine. So that is. That's one scenario, yeah. And the other one is, hey, we had we haven't had unions for 20 some years in C#. And so you did your best to write your own union types. Some of you, you have your own things that represent unions.
You're like comment, do not derive from this class or comment, do not assign any other types to you know, you're trying your best. And now here we are with a brand new language feature and we're stomping all over you and saying, Nah, Alice is better. So instead you can put that union attribute on your existing types that you want to be unions and maybe add a few more members and stuff to make the compiler happy. And now your existing type can also become a union.
Types in the eyes of C# in the eyes of the compiler can get that exhaustiveness in the switch and the implicit conversions and all of that for free. So that is, those are the reasons why the underpinnings of the syntax itself are exposed for you to to do whichever way you like, yeah. It's sort of like, I mean, there's a lot of features in C really starting with, I mean starting from the beginning. But we've had a lot of features that like that are built on patterns, right? Things convention that we put in that you can go and implement yourself.
They're not necessarily. You know, in the type system per SE, but the compiler will triple them specially, right? And so that's what we've done with unions. And this is just kind of like the basics and you can go deep, you can go far, and it's pretty cool. And most of you will never need to do this manual union writing stuff but it's probably good for you to see how our default one what that looks like inside. Now you know that it is in fact a struct with a single reference field inside that it that it puts the whatever values they're into and boxes and casts on the way in and out.
Good to know for like when you're thinking about performance or whatnot. So that's pretty much it for the. Unions in C#? Unions in C#, Yeah, that we would love to take questions, but we'll probably only like get to 1 and then we have a final slide we'll say. Exhaustive.
It's huge. Yeah, but we before we do the questions like I know more, more of you might want to talk to us about it. We'll try to sneak away far enough that we're not upsetting the next session here when we're done and then we will do our best to make it over to the experts zone over the. Pavilion over there the. Pavilion over there, that's the green dev tools area.
That's like a big cube. We'll be hanging over here. We'll try to be there.
So come talk to us about unions there. OK. All right.
Let's take the question though. Yeah. Excellent. You're gonna have to say it again, but you got to. You have to practice and. That's OK, Fantastic case.
I'll even stand up for you. So can you. Obviously this exists in TypeScript JavaScript, which is probably what many people are familiar with, and it's used kind of in a different way.
A lot of times because it doesn't support overloads, you end up using that with inbound parameters and things like that. I'm sure you had tons of discussion about how this should be done here. Can you just like expose us to a little bit of that internal dialogue from your team? Yeah, we'll do so. So in TypeScript, union types are they're kind of structural. You don't have to declare them by name. You can just sort of cook them up on the spot. Like, you know, you can say dog or cat or bird and like it just in as a type of something and it'll figure it out.
And we were really like, we had some envy of that. Took a stab at it I think. Yeah we tried designing down that
down that path but what we found was TypeScript has it easy because all the types in TypeScript go away at compile time. They don't exist at runtime. Types don't have to exist at runtime. But if we do union types in C#, they have to mean something at runtime too. You have to be able to, to ask questions about them at runtime. That's just how.net works.
So we can't just throw them away. And for that it's better to have types at the end of the day it's just better to have types that you then declare and give a name like if you want you can create a a library and maybe we will one day that is union of T
union of T1 T2 and so on that you can kind of get some of that structuralness back with generics. We haven't done that yet, but that's a, that's a possibility. So we kind of had to, we like the TypeScript is a, is unions of types. They are type unions and we took that, but these are, these are like nominal declared unions of types.
We couldn't do the other thing we made. I think we may come back to it. We.
May come back to it at some point. There might be a layer on top of this or something. That's their proposals. But for now, the compromise is this is more like delegates that you know some some languages have function types.
We don't have anonymous function types, but we have ways you can declare. Them and and in a functional programming language where you have discriminated unions that's very different right
Where everything's nominal than that. And so this is kind of like going right in the middle and trying to say like, can we do kind of both? Yeah.
And now we're right. So let's put that slide up. But now you've got a taste of what will happen if you ask us a question after. Yeah. So we're going to, we're going to do something like that. We, it took us five years roughly to get to this very simple design. So we, we went down a lot of paths and we were happy to talk about it at length here, though just a few resources. The preview of Visual Studio for instance that's out has support for uniontypesthe.net 11 preview VS Code especially if you run the C# extension in pre. And the insiders are pre release. Extension, Yeah, it will get what we showed will be there in about a couple of weeks, I think, so it will get even better.
There's some bugs in there, but that's it. So go try it. Thank you for listening. Come ask questions. See you all later.
Hope you like it. Yeah.
END
