Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: LIVE141
Speakers: Chip Huyen, John Maeda
John Maeda: Hello, everyone. We are lucky to be here with my friend, Chip Huyen. Oh, my gosh. Everyone know AI Engineering? Come on, that book, yes, changed your life. We're going to cover practical AI systems and zoom all the way into the 3D world, robotics. Chip, first off, can you tell me about the ChatGPT moment you described? When ChatGPT came out, what happened in your mind as a machine learning AI expert?
Chip Huyen: So hi, everyone, my name is Chip. I'm very excited to be here today. I was telling John, when ChatGPT came out, I had this a moment of -- I think I had two months of existential crisis, because, suddenly, I felt like, what is my purpose if AI can do so many things so well? I think it's like two things that I have always thought of myself as being good at. One is writing, and the other is coding. Both of the tasks are the top tasks that AI could automate. It took me a while to understand. I spent a lot of time talking to people, understanding how AI is doing, try to evaluate a lot of tasks, and try to figure out where AI is headed. A lot of the learning became the book, AI Engineering. It sort of helped me understand what I want to build for the future.
John Maeda: I found it so interesting how you, an expert, also felt the existential crisis.
Chip Huyen: I think there is something about the more -- I think we have thoughts that because I work in AI, AI shouldn't catch me off guard, right? I think there was some miscalculation because I had thoughts that a small improvement in AI will lead to a small improvement in use cases, which is not true. As a human, we are terrible at evaluating like how useful something is, right? If the AI generates something a little bit not fluent, we think of AI as being stupid. Then suddenly, from not-super-fluent to super-fluent in a very short period of time, and we suddenly -- before it could do maybe 10 tasks. Now it can do a thousand tasks. The miscalculation comes from small improvement accuracy somehow leads to a huge improvement in usefulness.
John Maeda: Oh, my gosh. I felt so much better when Chip said that by the way. So Chip, physical world --
Chip Huyen: Yeah.
John Maeda: -- you were talking about robots and robots sitting down, not an easy thing.
Chip Huyen: Part of my existential crisis after I followed AI more is that I tried to decide what would be the kind of things that AI would not be able to solve in the next two to three years right?
I don't want to spend a lot of energy or two years head down reading something and the new version of like Claude or new version of OpenAI will just eliminate it
right? I think I realized something like the human mind turns out to be a lot easier to model than the human body. First of all, we can see that AI can answer your legal questions.
It can help you write good essays. It can write amazing stories. It can write amazing programs, but I have never seen a humanoid that can sit down properly. I'm not sure.
Has anyone ever seen a humanoid sit down gracefully? I see a lot of funny videos. You see this. Actually, human motion turns out to be extremely, extremely difficult to model. Another thing is that a lot of times, when AIs operate in the digital world, we usually have very good documentation, right? Let's say if we call the GitHub API, we kind of know, okay, these are the functions that we can call.
If we can call with the parameters, here's the expected return code. What are the types that we can expect? There's no such thing for the physical world, right? There's no such thing as like, okay, for an app, if we press this much pressure, it's going to break, right?
If we step on the child, it's going to die. Okay, I'm like -- I feel like it's a terrible example. I'm just saying we only learned about the environment descriptions and feedback loops by interacting with it. For AI to operate the physical world, it has to, essentially, learn all of that.
It's extremely hard to teach AI all of that information.
John Maeda: It's that, really, a higher accountability in the physical world.
Chip Huyen: Yeah, for talking about sitting down, how do you even describe to a robot, okay, if you want to sit down properly, you have to put your hands here? You have to put the feet here. You just -- because it's very easy to just flip over when you're trying to sit down.
John Maeda: When we go from language to the physical world, I mean, you've taught us how to use language. How do we do physical world? What can we take from the semantic world to physical world to say, maybe I can do robots?
Chip Huyen: Yeah, so actually, the progress in AI actually makes robotics a lot easier. Anyone here interested in robotics? Anyone here want a humanoid at home to help you laundry or -- a few? Well, I have bad news for you.
It's going to be a while. I think -- do you know about Unitree, the company, the Chinese company, it has a very cool robot? They're fighting for IPO. So Unitree is one of the very, very rare robotic companies that are actually profitable, and they're fighting for IPO.
The CEO has a really good talk. When he talks about robotic intelligence, he talks about two things. One thing is reasoning, right? Reasoning is about, okay, we ask a robot to go and fetch me water. Then we need to think, okay, the water is over there.
I need to go and pick up the cup, turn on the tap, get water, and bring it to the human. That's reasoning and planning. The other one is motion. The motion means maybe the robot knows what to do, but if it stands up, it just flips over. We then think that the robots are dumb, right? For the reasoning part, I think that it's actually very similar to the reasonings for the agent tech AI nowadays. AI is very good at taking a task and reasoning step by step on how to accomplish the task. Reasoning is something that we can actually do quite well with AI nowadays. The hard part for reasoning is the environmental feedback. It has to know if it presses too hard, the app is going to break.
If I put the weight here, then it's going to fall. That kind of feedback that we see a lot of people trying to teach AI what is called "world modeling." They're trying to encode information about the physical world so that AI learns how to operate in it. We see a lot of startups raising a billion dollars, right? Fei-fei Lee has a world modeling startup.
Yann LeCun has a world modeling startup. There are a lot of other fancy researchers and startup companies doing it, so it's a very exciting space. The other part is motions. A lot of -- have you seen the demo of robots doing a kung fu?
This is really, really cool. A lot of those movements are actually pre-captured. Complicated movements, like you program, okay, you want to do this punch. Then you move the joint like this, right? A challenge, or the holy grail, is to get a robot to generate movement on demand. Maybe it thinks like, okay, if I want to do this, then here's how I should move the joint. That is still a work in progress. I think it's a bit challenging for a robot to do, but I think that we are getting there.
If you look at the progress over the last few years, it's actually very promising.
John Maeda: When you think about robotics, there's always the vision part and the motion part. Are they connected somehow?
Chip Huyen: I think that people think that it could be related, but I think there's -- so there are two approaches to it. One is an approach of what people call the VLA approach, like the Vision Language Actions model, which a robot takes in like visual and then language commands, and then generate actions to do, right? What some people realized is, okay, it's really hard to collect robotic data with actions, right? The actions are very much dependent on the body of the robot. If you want a robot to walk, then you need to collect actions from robots that have legs. They cannot collect data from the robots that have wheels, right? If you want to do five-finger manipulations, you need a body with like five fingers. People found out that it's extremely expensive and slow to collect action data directly.
Then people started to decouple it like what if I just have a separate world model just to encode information about the world and then the robot can use that information visual understanding to generate actions separately. So yeah, they are, depending on how you structure it, I think they're all different bets. If you talk to researchers, they're having two very heated arguments. I talked to a company who does the VLA approach, and they said they, oh, the world modeling companies are stupid. Then if you talk to world modeling companies, and they say, okay, all these actions companies are stupid. We don't know yet.
We don't know it works until it works.
John Maeda: I've just figured out embeddings and pre-trained foundation models with language, and now more to learn. Oh, my goodness, so what should developers pay attention to as all these new primitives come online?
Chip Huyen: Oh, so you're asking what should a person --
John Maeda: Developers, what should they pay attention to right now, knowing it's going to start to roll out?
Chip Huyen: One thing that I find very challenging, personally, is to stay up to date with all the news.
It's just impossible. There's so much going on. I actually try to think about the type of problems I want to solve and I try to figure out
okay does this new thing help solve my problem or not? Otherwise, it was, okay, this company raised a lot of money.
This company going IPO. This person is doing this cool stuff. I keep getting pulled in different directions.
You know the horses in New York? You need to have a biter to keep it very focused. Sometimes I have to force myself not to get jerked in different directions just because the new things come out but focus on one set of problems something I'm interested in.
Second, is it worth solving? Is that something that can be solved by AI in the next two years? Then maybe I should probably focus on something else.
So yeah, just choose a lane, and, yeah, choose a problem that you care about. Maybe my approach is wrong. I don't know. I have friends who follow a lot of news, and they become very popular online. They make a lot of money, and I think that could be great.
I'm just not very good at that.
John Maeda: Chip says to focus, everyone. Do this, okay. I'm now sitting with you remembering how it's the Boston Dynamics, Spot, the first robot, whatever.
Chip Huyen: It's so cute, yeah.
John Maeda: I remember that someone told me, never stand near Spot, because when Spot falls, when Spot gets up, it moves not like a dog would move.
Chip Huyen: Yeah, so actually, the dogs are actually a lot safer than, say, humanoid. One challenge with humanoids, with robots, is the safety, right? It's very easy to fall over. Let's say a humanoid, like a G1, is 80 pounds, right? Let's imagine a chunk of metal, 80 pounds of metal, just falling on you.
You're in trouble. There are a lot of things I'm actually working on for safety features. I think one of these companies have a very interesting feature, like the 1X. They designed the robot so that the robot is actually very weak. In theory, it could get the robot to be very strong, but on purpose, it makes the robot very weak grip power. Like it can't even crack a nut, right? That it makes it safer, so the robot doesn't accidentally hurt people by bringing too much force.
We also follow this design of rules. For example, like never walk too close to humans. If some human comes close to it, then you step back, right, maybe 5 feet of distance or something like that. That's something you can do. Another thing that's very challenging is battery. Let's say if the robot is walking, and then suddenly, the battery dies, right? If it's mid-motion and the battery dies, it's going to flip over. You need to design a system to detect, okay, maybe of the battery is this much, then maybe it shouldn't attempt to move around. Maybe it should just pause. I think a lot of people are developing what is called self-charging so that when the robot knows that it's running out of battery it should move there.
Yeah, so there are a lot of safety features we need to think about when we bring robots into the real world, working with real humans.
John Maeda: Okay. If you're tired of LLMs, do Frontier Robotics. If you're going to go into this, you better focus because there's so much noise. Don't forget dog robots, kind of good, sort of safer, okay, not bad. Watch out for the battery problem. Last word to the audience on what's next.
Chip Huyen: What is next?
John Maeda: What's next?
Chip Huyen: Are you asking me what's next?
John Maeda: AI in the physical world, what's next in a few words.
Chip Huyen: I think it's going to be here. I think robotics, there are two schools of company. One is the companies who believe that robotics can be general purpose, the same way as a ChatGPT and Claude, right? They can solve multiple tasks at the same time. There are about 20 of those companies. They're very data-heavy, so they need a lot of money. They need to raise a lot of money. The other school of thought is an AI robotics company that focuses on more specialized robots. For example, here's a robot to fold the laundry. Here's a robot to cook the food, like packaging. Here's a robot to just move things around, like for delivery. I think the general-purpose company is very hard to predict when it's going to be here.
John Maeda: You heard it from Chip, "general purpose company," a little bit hard to predict, but let's make it happen, everyone. Thank you. Thank you, Chip.
Chip Huyen: Thank you, everyone.
John Maeda: Thanks, Chip.
END
