Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: LIVE159
Speakers: Filisha Shah, Nitya Narasimhan, Vivek Bhadauria
Nitya Narasimhan: Oh. All right. Thank you all very much for coming to the session, and I'm super excited to be here with two of my favorite people. So, Vivek and Filisha, do you want to just give me a quick introduction to who you are and what you do.
Filisha Shah: Hey, Nitya. Yeah. Super excited to be here. I'm Filisha. I work on the Foundry Observability Team.
Vivek Bhadauria: Hey. I'm Vivek, and I also work on Foundry.
Nitya Narasimhan: And I know we're talking a lot about agent optimization and why it's so important. So maybe you can kick this off for us, Vivek, by kind of telling us what makes it so difficult for us to optimize an agent today.
Vivek Bhadauria: Yeah. That's a good one. And agents are different from regular piece of software. The properties that makes agents so useful -- they're stateful, they're long horizon, they can plan, they can course correct, they interact with their environment through tools -- are also the ones that makes it very hard to test.
Nitya Narasimhan: Yeah.
Vivek Bhadauria: So regular piece of software, I generally have to find the right piece of logs and the right speed of software; and I can just trace through what's going on, and I can understand. With agents, that's no longer true because, as a developer, I'm not coding everything as is. That's the feature of agents. They also interact with the environment, so their state, the environment state and agent state drives its behavior. So it makes it incredibly hard to test, to reproduce. And those are all the problems where we are trying to solve with Foundry Agent Platform tool, all the way from build, run, and operate where you can trace, eval, and optimize all in one platform.
Nitya Narasimhan: I think, actually, and we've been doing this for a day now and talking to a bunch of developers and having a unified platform with end-to-end observability all the way from your planning to production is amazing. But he mentioned logs.
Filisha Shah: Yeah.
Nitya Narasimhan: So how exactly do we go from looking at these logs to getting to the point where --
Filisha Shah: Yeah. I think observability or actually testing agents is really hard. I think that that's sort of where Vivek is going. And that's where Foundry really shines in some ways is being able to understand how to test something that's non-deterministic is the whole new science behind evaluations
right? Evaluators, essentially, they rely on queries between sample queries or sample data. And they follow a pattern that then you then use a non-terminating LLM behind the scenes to then ask, Hey. My agent, how does it match up against something that I think should be the kind of answer? So from a very base perspective, evaluators are sort of your new test-driven development is what I like to call it, right. And we can use them both in the inner loop for development where you evaluate on top of datasets. And you can use them in the outer loop where you evaluate on top of live production faces coming in.
And that connection helps you keep up with the health of your agent.
Nitya Narasimhan: Yeah. But I was also going to say that one of the things that really struck out was the eval rubrics.
Filisha Shah: Yes.
Nitya Narasimhan: So, yeah. People are super excited about that.
Filisha Shah: Yes.
Nitya Narasimhan: What does that do for us?
Filisha Shah: The eval rubrics is like a new type of evaluator that Foundry has come up with and gives you this multi-dimensional way to evaluate, which is specific to your agent. And it gives you these weighted evaluators. And they tackle a lot of different dimensions. And you'll see that the coverage is so good that, no matter what type of the metric you're trying to track, it is able to handle that pretty well and guardrail against some edge cases. Yeah.
Nitya Narasimhan: I will tell you, people were fascinated by eval rubrics, and I can't wait to try them out. But I think we kind of talked about why agent DevOps is changing, and we've talked about why evaluation-driven development is important for developers. But there's this one left last thing, right? We all know that, the first time we build an agent, we can make it work. But, once it's in production, it needs to keep changing.
Filisha Shah: Yeah.
Nitya Narasimhan: So what are the things that we need to think about once it's in production to keep continuously optimizing it? Maybe I'll start with the inner loop.
Filisha Shah: Yeah. I think I teed this up a little bit, but I think the thing that you want to make sure is that, again, you are testing against any regressions, right?
Nitya Narasimhan: Yes.
Filisha Shah: So, whenever you make any, it's just the same principles that we use for regular apps. It's just you are now applying the non-determinism layer so the things that you are testing are just slightly different. So you're doing the same thing, and the way to maintain the piety of that is to maintain the health of your datasets. There's this concept of golden datasets and these concepts that come in that you test anything you do against certain sets of evaluators that Foundry will recommend, by the way, to you. And then you test against that. And then you hand it to production. And then...
Nitya Narasimhan: Yeah. And I will say that I completely blame Filisha for this, but she made me kind of learn about Foundry skills.
Filisha Shah: Oh, yes.
Nitya Narasimhan: They're amazing. But that brings us to the highlight of this. When in production, what do we do?
Vivek Bhadauria: Absolutely. Yeah. Absolutely. So the vision is that the more agent runs, the better it gets.
Filisha Shah: Yeah.
Vivek Bhadauria: And, to enable it, it really starts with inner loop where you define what good looks like through evaluations, rubrics. And then the production traces sort of drive your representative set of tasks. And, if you can use those tasks and then rubrics to then reflect and see that what should change in this agent and then assess if that change is actually working based on, again, the datasets that created through the traces and the rubrics that are provided, then you can continuously improve that agent. That's where the Foundry Agent Optimizer is working. And the goal really is to have this sort of this continuously improving agents. The more sessions they see, the better they become.
Nitya Narasimhan: Yeah. And I have to give a shout-out. If you haven't seen it, you should definitely go check out their breakout. It was BRK 252. Ask me how I know. But it was the most awesome demo that you did. And Agent Optimizer I think is going to be one of the things everyone should try out. Is it in private preview?
Vivek Bhadauria: It's in GitHub Preview, and it will be coming public preview by end of this month. But you can still sign up, and you can check out.
Nitya Narasimhan: So remember Vivek's name. Send him all your feedback because he's going to personally fix it all. But I think that those are the main things that I heard in the end observability story. So Agent Optimizer, Foundry Skills evals. And I think the other thing that I heard is we can now do evaluation of both single-turn and multi-turn conversations.
Filisha Shah: Yes. You can give the entire conversational context, right? So you've multi-turned. And then you also have user simulations that you can check on top of your traces to see exactly if there is a trace that's run against your eval. And there's something that's gone wrong, you can, with a quick click, actually find the representative query of what that was, the harmful trace or whatever.
Nitya Narasimhan: Yeah. Check out Trace Replace. You will not regret it. The coolest thing ever.
Filisha Shah: I love how excited you are by this. So let me ask you, what is the best agent you have made so far?
Nitya Narasimhan: Oh, you're just setting me up. Okay. So because she said so, you've got to go check out the lab. It's not the best agent. The best agent is the agent you learn from, right?
Filisha Shah: Yes.
Nitya Narasimhan: You've got to have an agent that breaks so you can fix it, and you learn by fixing it. So that's my favorite agent. What did you expect me to say? James Bond or something? It doesn't work. But we have about, I think, a minute left; so I'm going to put you on the spot. You're not allowed to choose your own product because that's what they wanted to do. What is the one thing you got out of Build? What was one thing that stood out for you at Build this year?
Vivek Bhadauria: Yeah. And this is my first Build.
Nitya Narasimhan: Ah. Welcome.
Vivek Bhadauria: So I really just like interacting with the developers over here. We have been building for a while a lot of these pieces of software and thinking about how end-to-end observability and optimization should be. But this talking to developers one on one, talking to them like how they are solving their problems and how this fits in, it's so exciting. That has been the best part. There's so many takeaways that I have, so many LinkedIn connects I have from all of that. Yeah.
Nitya Narasimhan: I was going to say we lay named it Build, and it's all about builders. How about you, Filisha?
Filisha Shah: I really like the food that they're serving. I really like how people go around on trays and give you food. I really think it's really fun. I like the venue. It's kind of fun. It's indoor, outdoor. I feel like a lot of people are seeing the day for the first time in their life, you know. It's kind of just bringing the outdoors to developers. But, actually, the thing that I actually really like is, you know, collaborating in person. I think it always energizes me to be around people and, you know, having a good time with my coworkers backstage. It makes me realize that I'm working with real humans to build agents.
Nitya Narasimhan: There you have it, folks. Thank you all very much. And don't forget to go check out the BRK 252 Breakout, and we'll see you all. Have a wonderful Build.
Filisha Shah: Thank you.
Vivek Bhadauria: Thank you.
[ MUSIC ]
END
