Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: LIVE144
Speakers: Monica Cisnerose, Scott Hanselman
Monica Cisnerose: Hi, everybody. My name is Monica Cisneros, and I am Senior Product Marketing Manager for Windows, and I specialize in Agents. And today I have Scott Hanselman.
Scott Hanselman: Hi. How are you?
Monica Cisnerose: Great. So today we saw you in the keynote. And then you showed a conversation with Peter, basically, him reaching out to you. Tell us what happened. How did that evolve? And what was your first impression with him, really, asking you about what you had built?
Scott Hanselman: I think that people don't realize that 99% of open source is community, and it's just people talking about stuff. There are people who thought Peter was an overnight success, and he'd built 450 previous utilities that were amazing. He was a well-known person in the open-source space. He'd built and sold companies before. So for people who are unfamiliar with him, they might be like, oh, who is this guy?
Where did he come from? But OpenClaw, when it came out in November of last year, was like, oh, this is cool. I can see where he's going with this. And then I started looking around, and I could see that he has a Mac. He works on a Mac. So I'm like, oh, I work on Windows. I'll make a Windows app that looks like the Mac app so I can participate as well. When someone sees something like that, it's a totally normal and reasonable thing to say, hey, you want to hang out? You want to do something? So it literally can be that easy. So he reached out, and he said, this is cool.
But all of the cool people that you're now seeing him surround himself with are people that he found or that he respected or that he was doing work with. In the case of the Windows application the Windows companion app
we were already as you know because you work on Windows and doing agents building Windows to be a great place for agents. So this might be a weird way to phrase it, but if you think about a Windows OpenClaw companion app is like the ultimate Hello World to prove that agents are awesome on Windows. So our job, your job and my job, is to make sure that the Windows platform, the underlayment, the base of the pyramid, is awesome for any agent. And in this case, Hello World, OpenClaw companion app is a proof of concept to see how Windows does. And as we learn more, we'll continue to make Windows better. So, yeah, it's just sometimes people just go, hey, you want to do this thing? Yeah, we should do that.
That's cool. Let's do it.
Monica Cisnerose: Let's come back to the application in a second. What I really want to know is what makes the open-source community so special? Why do people feel like they can reach out to each other, that they can help each other? Tell me more about that.
Scott Hanselman: I think that people don't realize that seeing a stranger multiple times in public doing awesome things is like
oh you're that person that did that thing. Oh, you're that person that did that thing before. Oh, I've seen you before.
Like you just sometimes need a couple of sleeps between you to go, this person seems safe. I've seen them at meetups. I really like their projects. Like we saw earlier, when we did the Scott and Mark Learn to Vibe.
Simon Willison, he and I have blogged and known each other digitally for 25 years. So you just send that person a message and say, hey, I like the cut of your jib, kid. You want to come and hang out? And open-source people and community people are builders. And they're excited to build, and they're like, yeah, that'd be cool.
I called Steve, and I called Cassidy, and I called Swix. I was like, hey, you want to do this? And they're like, yeah, that's cool. I'm down. That vibe, that positivity, is what makes the open-source community approachable because it's like improv. When you do improv, you always want to have a partner who goes, yes, and. So imagine building software. Peter says I want to do OpenClaw and then he meets Vincent and he meets Dallin and he meets all these different great people in the community. And they go, hey, want to do this? Oh, yes, and I'll add this little herbs and spices.
And I'll add that, and I have this open source project, and they start building.
Monica Cisnerose: Now that you started talking about working with Peter and Vincent, you mentioned that they work in a different way. Can you tell me more about that, and essentially, how do they work? What do people or developers at Microsoft can learn internally? But then also, what can other people learn about the way that they work with agents?
Scott Hanselman: So let's move away from agents for a second and talk about the concept of agency. One of the things that Vincent Koc said who is the Chief Architect of OpenClaw Foundation with Peter
he's kind of Peter's number two said is "I like high agency people." Meaning just fix it.
Just do it. Fix it. You have agency to fix that. We have the tests. We have a quality software development lifecycle. We have all the init tests, all the integration tests, all the smoke tests. If this thing is a bad change, it won't make it all the way out the process.
This is not a thing that is run on vibes. This is an AI-augmented software engineering project at scale, fastest-growing, open-source project ever. And if something is broken, somebody should fix that. And that, I think, that sense of like, me, I can fix that? So there's been a number of times when I'll ask Vincent or Peter, like, "Yeah, this thing is broken." And they're like, "You going to fix it?" And that is really cool. So I feel like people should be more bold and try going out there.
Because, yeah, if it breaks, then we'll fix it.
Monica Cisnerose: In your keynote, you mentioned the app companion folks. You mentioned that you have worked with also the Windows engineers. When you guys were working on this, was there anything in particular that you said, hey, this is different, and this is something that I'm really excited to bring to everybody? Like something that is essentially unique, or we're trying to be better than we were before.
Scott Hanselman: Well, I think there's a couple of things. So step zero was there was an existing companion app that helped you get OpenClaw running on a Mac. So when I took my original version, my goal was to have parity with the Mac.
I want you to be able to go one-to-one. And then the questions were, what can Windows do that is different? What can Windows do that is unique? How do we package our apps?
How do we do permission? How can I sandbox this app differently? It's not like a competition as it is a coopetition. I want OpenClaw to be great everywhere, and I would like to have a little extra zhuzh on Windows, because I like Windows. And I get to work with the Windows development team. So it is a thumb war as each thing gets better.
But it raises, to mix my metaphors, it raises the water level for everybody. So MXC which we launched and will continue to get better
being able to have a spectrum of containment I think you're going to see really cool features that we're still thinking up. And after the keynote, Peter came out and had some crazy mad scientist idea, and they're off running and trying to figure that out, like those ideas.
And he said, "Oh, you should talk to this person." And then they start talking, and then they go running. That's the vibe. So Microsoft, I think, is learning to go fast, but we have to go fast at a larger scale. When you have a billion users, you want to make sure that they're all happy.
So there's going to be a comfortable tension, and I think that's what's going to make us successful.
Monica Cisnerose: Can you tell me more about containers and containment? I thought that that was very interesting how you said that on the keynote.
Scott Hanselman: That was a funny bit of a -- I like alliterations, and I said, "Yeah, I've got all of the things available to me. I have containers and containment." I think that leadership and people in suits think that there's basically a slider bar with three clicks. And it's nothing is in a container, this is in a container, and then there's hypervisor, which is like a virtual machine.
But there's many, many, many click stops. When we say containers, like containers in the classic sense of container, an OCI container, you usually think about Docker. Now, Docker is a brand and a company, just like Kleenex is a brand. But if I say hand me a Kleenex, I don't necessarily mean a Kleenex brand tissue.
It could be any generic brand. So Docker is a company that uses containers and Podman that can do containers. And there are other things that can do containers. So we launched WSLC, which is a container runtime. So we can now run containers on Windows within the guise and the support of WSL. So we have now support for containers on Windows out of the box, which is awesome. Containment is a generalized, kind of like I drew a dotted line around some work, and I don't want it to escape.
So if I was going to say make a container for you to call Work IQ and get your details from Work IQ and your Outlook calendar, arguably, it shouldn't be going to your Google calendar. Arguably, it shouldn't be writing text files and sneaking around and doing stuff. It should have access to do the thing, and it should work perfectly. Whether that runs in a container
which is an implementation detail or it runs in some containment technology in some generic containment technology imagining it could be process containment session containment micro VM containment full VM containment that's up to some business person above us to decide. So Linux containers is a thing.
Containment is a concept.
Monica Cisnerose: Was there anything working on this that made you change how developers are going to start doing their work, in terms of system needs, in terms of their workflow, now that you're seeing agents working and the container and containment and all that thing between what developers do and use and then what IT admins require to actually make this work in work environments?
Scott Hanselman: Yeah. I think that the thing that has been the most helpful for me is this small, little thing, the Git worktrees. I think people are used to working in branches.
You check something out into a folder that's like D colon backslash Monica, and then that's your folder, and you're working on the Monica app. And you go to main, and you go to this, and you go to that. But what if you had a branch in a separate folder that was its own worktree that was related? I could then run multiple agents. So instead of switching around, I get this opportunity for doing things in parallel. So I've been running three to five agents in parallel and learning from how the folks at the OpenClaw community do stuff.
They'll sometimes run dozens, but I stick around three to five. That, I think, is a real unlock. And the GitHub app, the GitHub Copilot app, has that worktree support built in. So I think as people start to get that app as it comes out of preview I think they're going to be able to see how cool the combination of a Windows machine plus a dev drive plus worktrees is. It's pretty nice.
It's a pretty nice workflow.
Monica Cisnerose: Let's talk a little bit about the future. We are now seeing this new generation of agents that get a lot of access, that can basically go and essentially do things proactively. I have been seeing other agents that, for example, are learning through machine learning. Are you seeing any other trends happening within agents that you foresee in the next few months or in the next year or so?
Scott Hanselman: As we get towards the end of this conversation, I think the thing we should be thinking about is how dynamic policies that allow the agent to do exactly what it needs to do but no more. It's not one policy fits all. We're going to see policy engines, and each individual tool call, each individual piece of intent won't go into a generic container that has abilities to contain things. But it'll be dynamically generated for it. So that slider bar is going to change on a tool call-by-tool call basis, and what we want is for it to be invisible to the user and fully in control by IT so literally everybody wins. And if the container works, you didn't even know it was contained. It just worked.
Monica Cisnerose: Throughout this time, I have seen you be very intentional with how you do. And thank you so much for all the work that you have been doing.
Scott Hanselman: Yeah.
Monica Cisnerose: I appreciate it.
Scott Hanselman: I try to be intentional. And thank you for noticing.
END
