Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: DEM341
Hello everyone.
Can everyone hear me? OK? OK, cool. Yeah. Welcome to Day 2 of Build, I guess.
How has day 2 been going for everyone so far? Good, good. Cool. Yeah, yeah.
Like I was introduced I'm a software engineering manager on the Foundry of the Ability team and I'm excited to share with you today how you can run consistent high quality and actionable agent observability in Foundry no matter what agent framework you use or whether your agents are running. OK, quick show of hands. How many of you build or operate agents in production?
OK, cool, some of you. And so keep your hands up if all of the agents like either your agents or your team agents are running on the same cloud provider using the same programming language and same agent framework
anyone OK I guess 1 lucky person there. OK, So what we hear from customers again and again is that the production reality is that big companies like enterprise companies, they really have this heterogeneous agent set up right like that. You mean, you know, like maybe a sorry, so maybe a product team, you know, like they picked foundries, prompt agents because it's easier to iterate on the portal, right? And then a back end team might picked up land Graph and run it on AWS because land graph is the agent framework they are most familiar with. And the third team might have adopted ADK from Google because they are already on GCP.
We're on Gemini, right? And then all of a sudden maybe someone asks for Copilot SDK as a catch all because that's a new thing they have recently heard about. And very quickly you run into this mess that, you know, different agent framework, different hosting stack, different metrics and different dashboard. And then like all of a sudden maybe like a bad response came up from your agentic system in production and you are waiting to start to ask scary questions like, oh, which agent did that? Why did the agent return this bad answer?
And how do we prevent bad behaviors from happening in the future, right? Today I'm going to show you how to answer those questions in one place. Foundry observability. Not by rewriting your agents into one agent framework, but by adopting open AI, sorry, open telemetry instrumentation with a few lines of code and without changing your existing agent logic. And everything we show in this demo are live and available on Foundry. You can check out the code and reproduce everything we show with the repository we will share at the end of the talk. Let's start with a simple agent before bringing multi agent, multi cloud setup. OK, you guys can see this right? OK, so if this is the first time you are saying this, this is Microsoft Foundry portal and this is a playground view that allow me to quickly configure and test out my agents, right?
And the story here is that, you know, I grew up in Xi'an, a famous tourist destination in China, and often get asked by friends for travel recommendations. So I went ahead and built a travel expert agent with Foundry's no code offering called Prompt agent, right? And what I did is that I picked a model for my agent. I gave it some judge prompt, sorry, system prompt. And you know, it can be even like multi language if you want. And the secret sauce here is that I have this kind of travel notes in PDF file, right?
With even pictures and different links and everything. I uploaded it to the Foundry here as an index so that my agent can access that travel notes when it needs to. OK, and I can send a question here.
For example, plan a three day trip in Xian for two people. Focus on history and the food you can see the agent started to return detailed itinerary, which shouldn't be a surprise today, right? It calls out, you know, famous places to visit again in multi languages and also restaurant recommendations, right. We can take a closer look here again, like, you know, three day, like day by day plan and like with all the details calling out like interesting places, right?
But again, like we're in 2026, this shouldn't be a surprise, right? What's more interesting is that I can go to the traces view to see like how the agent was able to get to that answer, right? Here is a list of all the previous conversations I've had with this agent. And like there are different dimensions you can see here, like token cost, token in, token out, maybe estimated cost, right? And I can do sort and filtering if I want to. And maybe we can also like dig into a specific trace.
OK, let's try a different one. OK, Yeah, this is a good one. And Foundry provides also this like clear view to allow me to understand the behavior of my agents, right? I can even maximize it a little bit at the upper right corner.
It's a little bit small. But I think these are key metrics about this conversation like number of spans, number of chat calls, number of tool calls, latency and token consumption, right? So it's very clear those are the key metrics. And if you look at this tree view, everything is rooted under a single invoke agent spam that has the system message, the input from the customer and the output from the agent. And following that is a executed tool spam that the agent uses to look up my travel notes right?
If we look take a closer look at the metadata tab here, we'll be able to see like, oh the this is a query the agent used to retrieve content from my PDF file, right? And this is like the final answer the tool was able to retrieve to give back to the agent. This is kind of a classic RAG pattern if you guys have heard about that and in case you know like if the agent running into any hallucination problem or groundliness problem
this is likely we will where I will start my debugging from and eventually everything is fed into an LM for the final answer. You can see that we have a replay button here that, you know, I can choose the speed if I do this, you know, I see like how the agent is actually being executed. And if I go to the user view, I can even experience what an end user will see from this agent, right?
Pretty cool. OK, yeah, this really gives me a very clear view to help me to deeply understand my agent behavior and debug issues when I need to, right. And at this point, you might be wondering, does this only come with Foundry native agents? What about my agents running somewhere else, right? Do I get the same experience? To answer that question, let me bring in my colleague like Kumar.
Hi, talk about that. Hi, I'm Nak Kumar and what I did along with Hanshi was to build a similar travel agent about the place that I'm from Bangalore and I call it the Bangalore travel agent. Unlike Hanshi's agent, Mind runs on GCP using the Google, Google's ADK, and after registering it on the Foundry as an external agent, we'll get to see the same rich trace experience that you saw earlier. So this is my trace experience screen, and I can click on a screen on a trace and then look at the responses. But while we do that, I want to also send a request to my GCP agent via curl. So you can see it's running on Run dot app, which is DCP. And then we can take a look at the response as soon as it's up here. Yeah. So that we know this is a real agent running on GCP, right?
We're not like picking anything. Yeah, I guess it will take a little bit to come back because of network. OK, here it comes back. Yeah, you can see the city there. And what? OK, like this is a real agent running on GCP, right? We were able to send the HP request and get this response back. And to make this even more interesting, because like Kumar and I both live in Seattle currently, so we even build a third agent for Seattle Travel Tips and we have it using the land graph and running on AWS. Yeah, so I'm doing the same thing, sending out a call to my agent on AWS with a question about Seattle.
And while this is running, I'll explain the whole magic behind it. We also built another agent which acts as an orchestrator. And that agent was built with Microsoft found is deployed on the Foundry as hosted agent and uses our Microsoft agent framework. The way it works is it routes intelligently based on the city that you ask it to. And then all of them would emit open telemetry traces.
We can. Here's the difference for the Seattle agent, and we can jump into showcasing how the trace looks like that. Sounds great.
Let's do that. So this is the same agent that I told you about, the orchestrator that we have. This is the one. That will invoke multiple agents across multiple.
Clouds, right? Yep. And if you see my message, I'm asking about Seattle, Bangalore and Lisbon.
Lisbon is not one of the countries that we built an agent for. So there is a copilot SDK which acts as a fall back for cities that we don't have data about or we don't have like a specialized agent for. While this is running, I can head on over to the traces tab and show you an open trace from earlier. So this was the invoke agent span earlier I asked it about like Seattle and Berlin and the city router kind of decided to route this to like the Bangalore and the Seattle agent. And then you can see it invoke the Seattle specialist to get all the details about Seattle and then goes back into the copilot fall back for our Berlin related data. Yeah, that is super cool. And to recap, right, So here is a bird's eye view of what has just happened.
It's actually the next slide. Yeah. So what we saw from the playground is that a user asked a question to the orchestrator and the orchestrator runs in a foundry hosted agent. That's kind of the pro code agent that will talk a little bit more like in a little bit, right.
But that agent serves as orchestrator and route the question to the right sub agent that is the specialist of that specific city. And you can see that each sub agent is running on a different cloud running with different agent framework. But because of all of them are emitting open telemetry traces, Foundry observability was able to stitch together the end to end execution and put everything in one uniform unified trace. And and that's why, like even though they are running across multiple clouds, it feels like everything is in one system.
OK, yeah, now let's talk about the key ingredients that made this possible. OK, first is Microsoft's agent platform. We showcase like a foundry agent, foundry prompt agent, right? That's the no code agents I demoed at the beginning of the talk. And Foundry also has like hosted agent, that's our orchestrator agent.
That's the pro code. You submit your code or your container to Foundry and Foundry helps you to manage that and run your code right so that we have full control of the agent behavior. And Foundry's hosted agent is what really shines for enterprise scenarios because it has enterprise grade VM isolation. It has agent identity that from Ontree that really guarantees security and it has like key features like long running operation routines, right, that are all like no very nice features for enterprise customers.
But you know, like pro code or no code, I think it's up to you. But like foundry got to cover like you can choose another one that fits your needs, right? And once you have that, you can have the your agent built in GitHub with code and prompt check in to GitHub right? You can run your agent in Foundry with beauty in observability, evaluation and optimization. And once you are ready, you can distribute your agents to users on M-65. The second ingredient is open telemetry is Gen.
AI Semantic conventions. Think of this as a common telemetry schema across frameworks. Whether it's the Foundry Prompt agent, a land graph app, or an ADK service, they emit spans with consistent attributes for agent names, model calls, and key events. That consistency gives you a strong compatibility with downstream observability and evaluation features on Microsoft Foundry. Microsoft heavily contributes to the standards and we actively add new scenarios to support.
Yeah, that sounds great. Now, Kumar, can you show us what code change that you need to make to adopt open telemetry instrumentation? So Microsoft Open Telemetry Distro is the unified SDK that can instrument most agent frameworks in multiple programming languages. Foundry native agents have Microsoft Open Telemetry Distro instrumentation built in, so I didn't have to make any code changes. But for agents outside of Foundry, the distro supports auto instrumentation and it's just a few lines of initialization code to set up the SDK.
Let me hop on over to VS Code. So this is my agent and all I have to do is say use open telemetry and enable using it with Azure Monitor and pass the Azure Monitor connection string, tell it what framework I'm using and give it the agent ID. This is the same agent ID that I used to register the agent on Foundry so it can pull up the traces and correlate them.
Yeah, great. One thing to call here is that Foundry Observability is powered by Azure Monitor and Azure Application Insights, right? And all of the foundry's traces are stored in Azure Monitor.
So if you are an existing Azure Monitor users, maybe for like other part of your nonagentic workflows and architecture, you can keep using existing Azure Monitor features that you might be already familiar with. Cool. Now that we will see unified traces from O3 clouds, let's talk about why this matters in production, right? Because, you know, seeing all the traces is great, but the real value is operational that you want to, you know, debug issues and monitor patterns and evaluate quality in one workflow. So traces are only useful if they can answer questions quickly, right? In production and for example like questions people may want to ask in the demo setup we had is you know did the routing agent route the question to the right sub agents right?
Did the retrieval return like weak contacts that might have caused hallucination problem or maybe like the did the latency come from a cold start network, slow network or the model itself? And over time, we want to probably monitor if there's any trend that the agent behavior is shifting. We touched based on debug ability earlier in the talk.
Let me show you how the Monitor tab works. Here you can see the live traffic patterns, latency distribution and a few evaluation results. One of the interesting things is the estimated cost, the total token usage, the type of evaluations which ran on the agent scheduled evals. There were a few and then scheduled red teams as well. If we Scroll down, you can see some operational metrics and one of the things I noticed is the error rate went up earlier.
I should probably should get that checked out. And if you keep scrolling down, you can see more scheduled evaluation results and what the human evaluator did on this as well. Yeah, one of the tool called Successes also went down recently. I guess we should take a look at it soon. OK, now let's take a look at the fleet wheel. On the Operate tab, you can look at all your agents in a particular Foundry project and take a look at everything that pops up. One of the things you can see is our Active Alerts Foundry. If you have an agent on Foundry
by default you have a security workflow running so you get alerts on you know
things like malicious URLs were detected or a jailbreak attempt was made on your prompt and things like that. You can also set up alerts on evaluation results. So let's say your agent stops working the way it's supposed to do. Then you can be alerted on it and you can see things like agent success rate, agent volume, which was the most used volume agent over time, and so on. Yeah, that's very cool. Definitely feel more confident in production operations with low small interviews. Now maybe let's talk about evaluation.
Yeah. So for evaluations, let me pull up some code that I wrote. You can set up evaluations on traces using the Foundry project line and select what evaluator you want to add into the testing criteria. Here I have intent resolution evaluator, and then we run this on a particular agent ID. So once you set this up and create an eval, you get to see eval results which kind of look like this. So this one ran a bunch of different metrics, and I can see that there was some trace which didn't work well. So I'll click on this trace and we'll be directly taken into the trace view of that particular agent.
And once you click on it, you'll be able to identify what went wrong. The first thing that I want to see is oh, this was a the users intent was to compare Bengaluru and Barcelona for an after work evening and keeping the plan concise. But when I see the eval results which show up here and the task adherence was when we saw the failure. So the user asked for a concise comparison, but the response material did not cover both cities and hence the task adherence came out to be a failure. Let's see what the response was.
Well, yeah, there is no comparison. There is description about both of them. I guess the evaluator was looking for a table. Yeah, that's pretty cool. And yeah, so the the loop we want to draw here is very simple, right? Like instrument your code with open telemetry
debug evaluate and optimize in production with live traffic and then like again fleet level visibility if you want to manage and control them and everything are done on like 1 observability plane. OK, cool. And like there are like so many great foundry features that we cannot cover due to like time constraints in this session, but want to call out on them so that you guys can check out check on them later. So rubric evaluators like creates customized evaluation plan tailored to your agent, right? So that solves your evaluation code start problem.
Agent optimization improves your agent by you know, fine tuning your system prompt, trying out the different models and maybe leveraging like a few new tools for customers who want to leverage or opt in for 865. Foundry natively supports that. And as much as we like and support and recommend open telemetry is generative in AI semantic conversions
we understand like some customers might be using another trace format today and may not be easy for them to switch. That's why we want to meet customers where they are. So we support these two popular frameworks, popular format open inference and open elementary for like trace viewing and trace evaluation. Exactly, We recommend you to check out recordings of other Foundry sessions.
R Wizard Foundry's public documentation. Here's the QR code that connects to you to our repo where with all our agents that we had showcased earlier. Yeah, that's great. And we are really proud of the breadth and depth of what Foundry has to offer to help you to run consistent high quality and actionable of agent observability right and build what you want
run it where you need and observe it all in one place any agent any cloud
one observability plane. Thank you.
END
