Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: LIVE110
Speakers: Alex Pall, Charles Lamanna, Drew Taggart
[ Music ] [ Music and Applause ] [inaudible]
Alex Pall: Yep, yep.
Charles Lamanna: Awesome. Thank you so much, everybody, for joining us today. I'm super excited to be here today with Drew and Alex to hear a little bit about some of their thoughts on the startup ecosystem. They lead Mantis VC, as well as being known for a little band called Chainsmokers, not so little. Thank you for doing the show tonight. And we're really going to go dive right into it. So the first question I really have for you guys is you kind of take a look at the startups that you interact with and what you look for in terms of measuring success and opportunity. What are some of the things that you kind of pay attention to as people are kind of growing their company from scratch?
Alex Pall: I mean, so many different things. By the way, this is probably news to you guys that we have a venture fund. We've been investing out this fund for several years now, actually just about to launch our fourth fund, and we absolutely love technology and startups and entrepreneurship.
So it's very cool to be here with everybody. As far as what we look for, I mean, there's a number of different things that I think we think about. We invest at the early stage, so, generally, there's not a lot of empirical evidence at this stage of a business. So we're really investing in people. And I think that I've learned this over the last 12 years since we wrote our first check, that it's always about the people. We care deeply about investing in mission-driven founders or teams that believe in an idea of where they think the world is heading. And we've also invested in teams that have been wrong about where that vision is going, but generally speaking, if we've invested in the right people, the right outcome generally ends up happening.
So I'd say that's where we'll start.
Charles Lamanna: Makes a ton of sense. And I think one of the things which we're seeing a lot is the leverage that one company can have can just be so massive now with this idea of coding agents, AI agents surrounding, supporting everybody. So I'm not sure, as you guys go look out and what you see in the industry, are you seeing this type of idea of one person driving a business that does a billion dollars of revenue, or 10 people driving a business that drives a billion dollars of revenue? Does that seem like something that's realistic or makes sense to you, or kind of what traits do you think would enable something like that?
Drew Taggart: Yeah, for sure. I mean, we are definitely -- oh, what's up? I should have done the one, two, three, put your hands up, or -- I usually do that at our shows, usually get -- okay. Cool, we got a full house. All right. Great. We were definitely seeing people have the ability to scale a lot faster. We get an idea kind of like looking at a team and the people that are surrounded like if this idea is going to work and they have the ability to do it way quicker, where I feel this is the seventh year that we've been -- sixth year we've been institutionalized as a fund where businesses just took a lot longer. There was a longer expectation for things to work. And now, I think we're more comfortable betting earlier because we know that people can do a lot more with a lot less way quicker.
Charles Lamanna: Yeah. That makes a ton of sense.
Alex Pall: I also -- why do we care about whether one man can build a billion-dollar company? I mean, does that even sound like a world we want to live in? I love partnership.
I love teams. I think Drew is absolutely right. I think that with this technology now, you can get to an idea or solution faster. And I think you need to be asking yourself as a founder "Do I need the same resources I need before to accomplish the same things?" And you absolutely need to be thinking along those lines as you're building a business. But I think, more importantly, it's about what you can tackle now that you couldn't tackle before. And frontier tech is a space we're very interested in. And I think that, with AI the enablement of that technology, you can tackle harder, more interesting problems.
And that's why I think you're seeing a lot of the most talented people going towards that industry right now.
Charles Lamanna: Yeah. I really like that because it's not about making it so you don't work with other people when you build your company. That's not what anybody really wants to do.
Alex Pall: It'd be a weird thing being like, "I'm doing this idea, but really what I care about is being the first billion-dollar founder."
Charles Lamanna: Yeah. That makes a ton of sense. And as you think about what one person can do in terms of tackling maybe harder technology or going into markets which historically were very hard for a startup to get into, does that change at all in terms of how you approach your portfolio or companies that you look at or invest in, or do you think that's kind of just more and maybe higher scale than in the past?
Drew Taggart: I wouldn't say it changes how we look at things other than the fact that, like I said before, we're willing to bet earlier. But it's still just about people, the right idea, the right partners around them. I mean, we are a smaller fund. It's important to us that they also have other investors around the table that are really going to help them in a way that we are still learning how to. And you can kind of get a sense of the right team of people. And but I don't think the technology is really changing the -- at least for us, evaluating who to invest in, who not.
Charles Lamanna: That makes sense. Yeah. I mean, a lot of the things probably that makes a startup founder successful in terms of having high agency and being a creative problem solver and being mission-driven, all just are amplifying this new world, so makes a ton of sense, though. So I would say the last 12 months when it comes to AI is really been focused on this idea of gone are the days of just an AI assistant that's like a chatbot, and here is the reality of AI agents which can run for long periods of time, take actions, do complex, sophisticated things. Is that match what you guys are seeing and kind of your perspective? Anything that you'd add to that?
Alex Pall: Yeah. I mean, I think that's the future that we're investing into right now and certainly, the strategy that we're looking for opportunity within. I mean, I think right now -- and I kind of mentioned this earlier when we were lucky enough to be on stage with Satya, is that everything was orchestrated around this human-in-the-loop kind of software-enabled world.
And now, it's agent-to-agent. And you need to kind of re-architect and rethink what that means across the board from co-generation to governments and runtime to security. And that makes this an incredibly exciting time to be an investor and looking for different opportunities, but also, if you're a CISO, I'd be shitting my pants right now about what my employees are doing. And it definitely presents its challenges. I mean, stories about Uber's team blowing through all of their credits for a year in one month. And so I think everyone's trialing and erroring what is working, but we're also developing the infrastructure around what that future means and looks like.
And so, there's definitely going to be some really terrible stories about it going wrong, but I think that's what also makes this time as an investor super exciting, is looking for these opportunities around those areas that will enable this future.
Charles Lamanna: Yeah. That makes a ton of sense. And I mean, maybe a little more personally, is there any AI tool that you couldn't live without, maybe something that's more agentic than the last couple of years?
Alex Pall: I mean, yeah. I mean, I think it's funny because I was thinking about this the other day. And I have to believe right now that AI, there's so much more writing being put out into the world with AI, because I used to be able to read through my news and feel like I confidently had a pretty good grip on what was going on today or this week. And now, it's just like, holy moly. There's so much shit every day. And so I'm summarizing the hell out of all this stuff. And that's really helpful. And, of course, I'm not the most technically skilled investor out there. So from a research standpoint, it's really helpful to dig into these companies and these ideas and walk away feeling like I have a really grounded understanding of what the problem is or what the space looks like. And so that's super helpful. But I know you probably have a different answer.
Drew Taggart: No. I was just thinking the differentiate -- because obviously, half of our job is investing. Half of our job is music. On the music side, we don't use AI at all. Not that we wouldn't. I just -- we just -- it's not part of our workflow. And we love making music the way that we make it. But, yeah. I mean, I agree with everything he said from terms of -- like summarization and productivity and being able to understand things that I didn't have the time to read or are way more complex than my DJ brain can handle, so.
Alex Pall: I'm definitely using the like, "Explain this to me like I'm a kid." And it's always a lemonade stand. But also, you use the word like Drew used the word "workflow," which I think is really interesting. I mean, in our fund, we do like -- it is -- the intelligence layer is powered by Palantir, which is pretty cool as a fund of our size to have that technology. And it's super helpful for diligence and pulling in all the different things our colleagues are working on and investing in and the updates. But it only works if the workflow is built into the way we work versus the way that it was built and designed for. So I think that goes back to the kind of the last question, which is, how do we make this stuff work for us versus the other way around?
Charles Lamanna: Totally. Makes a ton of sense. And like one of the big things at Microsoft we're very focused on is how do you bring AI to places people already spend their time today, so you have to learn a new tool or a new approach. And I think the -- there's just big debate about what happens as AI does more of jobs and things like that. And I think your example was a great one.
You'll spend more time making music and less time doing research. Who wouldn't want a world like that and powered by AI? So makes a ton of sense.
Now so one of the things that you guys deal with a lot from an investment point of view is trying to understand the kind of where in the stack will value accrue and where is most opportunity because as you think about competition and differentiation you can be right that the internet's a big deal but if you're at the wrong layer in the stack maybe there's not a lot of -- not a lot of economic opportunity.
Do you guys have kind of a view, a thesis that you guys use when it comes to investing for AI companies?
Alex Pall: Yeah. I mean, we're both personally invested in Anthropic and OpenAI. So I don't want to say that those aren't going to be extremely valuable companies, but they're horizontal businesses.
And they're definitely creeping up and down the stack. But I do think that layer ultimately gets commoditized away, whether by open source or just purely by their own competition with each other. I think that what's interesting, and I read this somewhere, and it made me think about 15 years ago, when you got a cell phone, you had a limited amount of data.
And if you went over, you paid extremely high fees and costs. And now I stream whatever I want, whenever I want on my phone from Verizon, AT&T, T-Mobile, whatever you name it. And I can -- I know it's not the same thing as intelligence in the way we're looking at AI, but it does -- I feel like history doesn't repeat itself, but it rhymes on some levels. So we kind of mentioned it earlier, but I mean, we're super interested in hyper-verticalized use cases of AI in regulated industries, legal, enterprise finance, compliance, insurance, health. And then the security stack, I think, is such an interesting place to be playing because it's just a simple bet that if this AI continues to get better, what does it look like on the other side?
And so it's AI fighting -- protecting AI, which is an interesting concept.
Charles Lamanna: Yeah. Like the -- if agents are trying to hack you, the only thing that can defend you are more agents. So that's exactly right. And I think the -- one of the things that we get really excited about Microsoft is we like to build software everybody in the world can use. If tokens are metered at a high cost, you kind of can't build software that a billion people can use. So I really like that same idea of commoditizing to drive the cost down over time. So maybe expand a little bit on the vertical SaaS kind of angle. So you mentioned it's very security, legal, kind of that domain. Is it beyond that, like, say, sales domain or other verticals that you're focused on?
Alex Pall: Yeah. I mean, we're invested in Monaco AI, which is a great company. I know they've been flying their planes around the city here. Sam Blond's an incredible CEO. And I think what you're looking for in -- and it's different for every industry, but regulation becomes your moat. And working through proprietary data, kind of becomes this self-reinforcing prophecy around the success of your business. You end up ultimately hopefully building like a context graph that becomes your defensibility long-term around why it's a huge pain in the ass to switch off this platform. And so we're in companies like Kepler in enterprise finance, Rogo in actual finance, Monaco in sales. Yeah, exactly.
Sandstone in legal. And to us I know there's probably a limited amount of verticals ultimately and so the hard part now is finding those sort of undiscovered areas that haven't already been built or well on their way to success. But it feels like a nice, smart place to investing relative to where the model companies go. And I won't lie, I'm asking myself all the time, it's like where does the model end and the app layer begin? And I think generalist investments are in for a world of pain. I love the idea of having an AI companion. I'm too old to really understand fundamentally what that looks like at this point.
But I'm paying attention to my 10-year-old cousins, and I'm like, "Are you guys -- " the same way that Snapchat was probably a little too late for me. Are these habits that are being formed around these platforms, and what do they look like in the future?
Charles Lamanna: All right. And I think it's super encouraging for you to say that there's a lot of room for products on top of the model because I think talking to a lot of the startups that are here at Build today, that was probably the most common question I got, is, "What's the role for my company above the foundation model?" And I think what we're seeing matches very much with what you're saying, which is this idea there's a lot of space around it, particularly as you go to these narrower, deeper, data-specific domains. So super exciting.
Alex Pall: I mean, being a wrapper, there's definitely some inherent risk in that, and you need to be mindful of it. But they can't -- these model companies can't do them all, can't do it all. They're, I think, co-generation and they understand the importance around where that sits in the stack and what that can lead to. But I find it hard to believe they're going to be able to have complete coverage over every single aspect of what this intelligence layer can create.
Charles Lamanna: Yeah. Makes a ton of sense. So one of the things that people were asking me to make sure I ask you guys while you're on the stage is, how do you think about culture and its role for a startup as it takes shape? How important it is for you guys when you look at a company, what do you encourage and coach founders that you meet to do? What should this group take away in terms of how you think about building a company to last in a period of time where things are changing so quickly with the models and with AI?
Drew Taggart: Yeah. I don't know if this is a perfect parallel, but during this kind of startup boom, and I mean, since we've been paying attention to it, I've always kind of related it to being an artist. And we had a really interesting (inaudible) career. It looks like, I mean, we had our first hit song two years after we met, but it was a song called Selfie.
And it was a song that we made as a joke to kind of go viral and get people to like find out about us. And it kind of accomplished a little bit of goal, a little bit of our goals where we got our first record deal. We had a song on the charts. People knew who we were, but we had this product that didn't represent us and wasn't inherently who we were or what we wanted to continue to make.
So I wouldn't call that like product-market fit in terms of a startup. But we eventually found that a year later with this song called Roses. And when we kind of unlocked that
we went on a tear with -- we went on -- we stayed in the Billboard Top 10 for three years after that and really had a lot of success when we really locked into what we were best at. And that's an experience that we try to relate to with our founders, is, are you building the right thing? Because there's a lot of things that even when you have a functioning team that goes to build something that is working, is this the right thing?
Is this opportunity big enough? Can you scale past the inevitable hurdles even if you are successful? And so hopefully, that makes a little bit of sense to them. But that's what we experience. And it gets weird, too, when you get older. We're lucky enough to have had a music career for 13 years now. To get over 10-year mark is crazy. And it gets weird.
If you're fortunate enough to have a moment where you're on the charts and you built a fan base and you're touring around the world, culture moves past you. How are you going to weather that storm? This is something that we talk about together. What is inherently our sound? Who are we as artists? What do we want to make? What is the thing that we uniquely do that we're able to continuously do forever and ever? And you can derive from that. And we've seen a lot of our founders and friends that are really iconic founders that are kind of tentpoles of the San Francisco scene over the past decade that -- we've seen them start do every -- they try to do everything. They were successful at this, and then they try to do five other things.
And the best ones usually revert to their core, and are very strategic about how they build out from there.
Alex Pall: Yeah. I mean, well, perfectly said. And I think also just being fast at learning.
Failure is a big part of being a startup, and understanding when you need to pivot, what signs you need to lead you there. But I think the worst thing people can do is just be opportunistic about AI right now and what they want to build. I mean, the other day, I was out at dinner with my girlfriend, and she was complaining about the outfit she ultimately selected.
And I went home and Claude-coded an app that she submits her outfit into now, and then pops out a grade whether it's appropriate for the weather and the occasion we're doing. And that was just a joke. You know what I mean? So we can truly build and do anything right now.
And so I think being intentional. And one of the big main qualities that we look for as investors is, can you build a cult following around what you're trying to do? And usually, in order to do that, you have to be so intentional and obsessed with the thing that you're working on. And I think you're going to get -- it's not a straight line, and there's going to be a lot of highs and lows.
And so make sure the thing you're focused and working towards is something you really care about deeply.
Charles Lamanna: Makes a ton of sense. And if you just had a one sentence to say what you're most optimistic about with tech and AI, what would it be? Finish us off. Claude-coding outfit apps, come on.
Alex Pall: Most optimistic about.
Drew Taggart: Most optimistic.
Alex Pall: I mean, can I shout out a company of ours?
Charles Lamanna: Yes, absolutely.
Alex Pall: All right. There's a company of ours called Factory AI. That's a local San Francisco company founded by Matan Grinberg, who is a PhD in physics. He cold-emailed Shaun Maguire at Sequoia, who then convinced him to go start this company. And they just raised a $1.5 billion valuation.
And they work in droids and co-gen. And what I admire about him is that they built for where AI is going, not for where it is right now. And I think that's how everyone should be thinking about it. You shouldn't be building for what this technology is doing right now. You need to be thinking about what it could be doing in three or four years from now.
And there was two or three years since we invested where I was like, "Is this guy right?" You know what I mean? Cognition and Cursor and all these other companies were making serious moves and then the market just shifted directly to where this agentic future is going and they are off to the races.
And it's very cool for me to be a part -- or for us to be a part of a company like that.
Charles Lamanna: That's awesome. Thank you so much again for being here today. Thanks, Drew. Thanks, everybody.
Drew Taggart: Thanks, you all.
Charles Lamanna: I'd say join them at 6:00 for the show later tonight.
Alex Pall: Did we surprise you guys? Did this blow your fucking mind?
[ Applause ]
END
