Microsoft Build
June 2-3, 2026
Session: DEM315
All right. Hi, everybody.
Thanks for coming and spending some time with us today. I am John Link, Partner Product Manager for Microsoft Discovery on. The project.
So today, since we only have 25 minutes with you, we've got a very simple agenda. 1st, I'm going to tell you about why we're excited about Microsoft Discovery and then Victor is going to show it to you in action. Now with Microsoft Discovery, we're driving advances for the world of science and R&D.
From chemistry and material science to bio drug discovery, physics, silicon design. It's an exciting field to work in. Now before we dive into that world, let's talk a little bit about the technology that makes it possible. It should be no surprise to everyone here, we're at a real inflection point with AI.
For the last couple of years, the bottle has been pretty clear. AI shows up as a productivity accelerator. You take a human doing a task, you add copilots, assistance, maybe an agent, and you get incremental gains, maybe 2030%. That's useful, but still linear, still bounded by human capacity.
What's changing now is agency, and it's crossed a threshold. We're flipping from AI assisting work to AI performing work, not replacing humans, but shifting the role that humans play in this new model. You don't have one person doing a task faster. You've got teams of agents continuously autonomously working, guided by humans. Now, R&D is not the first workflow that's gone through this inflection point. You know, software development is right in the middle of this, as you know. And if there's one thing one learning about that transformation that we've internalized, it's that it can happen almost overnight. Now, if you take a look at this timeline here, you know, we announced GitHub copilot back in 2021. For the past four years, it's evolved a lot with chat a Gen. tech mode agents moving to the cloud having a gradual impact on developer productivity.
However, last November, the flip happened. The release of models like Opus 4-5 GPT 52 added the required agency for those agents to be able to cross that inflection point. And suddenly, almost overnight, nobody's just talking about code anymore because the agents are now the ones writing most, if not all of the code, with developers guiding and steering the process. We believe the same thing is coming to R&D, and it is also going to happen almost overnight. If you step back for a minute, the R&D cycle looks surprisingly familiar.
Reasoning, generating hypotheses, running experiments. It's not that different from how we think about design, implementation and testing and software. And just like software, until recently, agents in R&D have mostly shown up as assistants and helps it individual steps. It makes scientists more productive.
But the human still has to run the loop, and we've seen that that model doesn't scale. In software, we crossed this line where we move from AI assisting tasks to gentic systems executing whole workflows. The same thing can now happen in discovery. This is a gentic discovery. Humans set the intent, the direction, and the judgment, and teams of AI agents execute that discovery loop end to end continuously.
That shift changes the bottleneck. Discovery is no longer constrained by how much exploration a human team can do, it's constrained by whether you have the right platform to run a gentech systems reliably, responsibly, and at scale. And that's the point where existing tools break. Humans still have a central role, but they move from executing every individual step to providing intent and guiding direction throughout the entire process using their own judgment and expertise.
This is not removing scientists, it's amplifying scientific judgment. And this transformation is exactly why we developed Microsoft Discovery. A Gentek AI gives us a fundamentally new way to work that we call frontier R&D. And the breakthrough isn't in intelligence alone, it's scale. We can now explore thousands if not millions of hypotheses in parallel not by replacing people but by letting AI agents do the exploration while humans provide the direction
the guardrails and the judgment. We introduced this enterprise platform last year at Build in private Preview, and this year we announced that we've taken it forward to general availability.
We've shared here at Build demos of developing novel immersion coolants that are P fast free. We've shown how you can breakdown plastics, using proteins for recycling and more. While our enterprise capabilities are key to our customer needs configuring Azure resources dealing with IT compliance can add friction for those who just want to understand what is possible in a gentic discovery. That is why we just announced the Microsoft Discovery app, which is a complement to our core enterprise services.
This is a free download that only requires a GitHub copilot license. To get started. With this app, we've now got a lightweight on ramp to Frontier R&D.
Now, rather than talk about it, I'd love to hand the stage to Victor to show it to you in action. He'll have some of the key capabilities that we've developed for scientific problems, like our discovery engine and our scientific bookshelf. And then I'll close things out by sharing a bit more about what our customers are actually doing in the real world today to address their own challenges.
So, Victor. Thank you. John, can I switch to this machine, please?
Hi, everybody. I'm Victor and this is Microsoft Discovery 1st. I'm going to ask Discovery a scientific question right here and explain what's happening here while Discovery is answering it for us. So to get started with Discovery, you can go to our GitHub community report, Microsoft Start Discovery. You can learn about the latest news, ask the question, find the link to documentation, and most importantly, find the link to our latest releases and then download and install it from here. I already installed Discovery in this machine, so we're ready to get started.
After launching Discovery, I logged in using my GitHub account right here. As John mentioned you do not need Azure account to start with Discovery
but if you do have Azure account you'll have access to our enterprise services such as integration with Azure HPC and Azure AI Foundry. Now this whole user experience may look familiar to you and this is because of Build Discovery and all Visual Studio Code, right and GitHub compiler to leverage power of these technologies. At the same time, we added new unique capabilities for scientific research and I will highlight three of them today.
First, the bookshelf, our graph based information retrieval system. Second is Discovery Engine that fully automates this scientific discovery loop, hypothesis, experimentation, reasoning. And 3rd, the user experience specifically tailored to scientific research.
And I will show all of them running here today locally in the app. But if you have Azure account, we also support an enterprise services running bookshelf and discovery engine in the cloud. And you can run this version of the discovery experience in the browser in case you don't want to start locally.
But for today, we'll just focus on the local experience because this is the easiest 1 to get started. Now Discovery organizes projects into Oh yeah, before we do that, I'll say that we're going to do the scientific research today. We're going to do computer science research.
The infrastructure is in high demand these days and as the engineers, sometimes they face a dilemma when we build the services, should we host them in containers or go serverless? And instead of just trying to guess, we're going to ask for a data-driven way and discover that together. OK, So yeah, Discover organizes information to projects or, and on the Discover app, the project corresponds to a local folder.
I open the one right here. And if I look at the files, this notebook is just popped here. It was just generated while Discover's answering the question that we asked. But all other files that are the system files that Discovery created when we created the project it didn't have anything to do with the question that we're asking
with one exception which is the bookshelf. So to start with this research and engineering, our team precurated a list of 100 scientific papers on topics of AI workloads, serverless architectures and containers. And just to give you a flavor of how that looks like, here is one example.
This is a paper from Microsoft Research few years back, put a detailed analysis here with some benchmarks or serverless architectures and for start up time and so on. And 100 pages. Papers have thousands of pages.
It will take me like days, maybe weeks to read them line by line. And this is too much to fit into a context window for a model. But instead of that, I created a bookshelf here in discovery here. And I indexed all these PDF files into this bookshelf.
Took about 20 minutes. I did that before the demo. During the indexing, the PDF files were converted to markdown files, so it's easier for the model to resent off them.
And again, think about the bookshelf as a rag, but with one key difference. Instead of a traditional vector store to keep in store embeddings, we actually use the graph data structures to store entities and relationship between them. This technology called Graph Rag, it was invented by Microsoft Research and we productized it in discovery. And it works particularly well for like a deep scientific applications that in papers that have a lot of entities and complex relationship between them.
And here I'm only going to use publicly available papers. But in reality, teams often decide to enrich their bookshelves with proprietary papers and knowledge so they can get answers specific to their organization. Let's now look at the question that we asked to the discovery. I will read part of it.
So saying hey we're conducting an analysis on whether to use serverless function or for a genetic tool calling in the Microsoft Discovery platform current our agents execute their tooling and dedicated container instances want to determine if we can reduce the cost by switching to on demand function execution whenever the tool call needs to be made. I created the bookshelf. Please review the corpus of data. Create a cheaper known books with your findings. Be sure to show advantages, the disadvantages of user containers. Be sure to generate grab, show resource consumption, trade-offs, price performance and so on. The main point here is it's not just a simple prompt. This is a pretty detailed instruction structure that you can imagine kind of has a conversation between the main experts and we found out that we get best result from discovery when our customers use their expertise to ask these detailed questions.
Before we jump into looking at their answers, I'll make one meta point we'll leave an interesting times. Technology is advancing and at precedent its speed things are moving super fast, but the demos demos become a little bit passive, right? I remember presenting a build a few years back and I was like constantly clicking and typing something to make the progress.
But here the flow is different now, right? We we collect the data, we formulate the problem, and then we let the system do the work while we can have a nice conversation about the product. And another nice thing, interesting thing that I actually don't have control over the precise output. Discovery is doing a pretty good job converging on the same insights, but the exact details actually vary from 1-1 to another. So I'm going to hide the chart here and we're going to look at the notebook that Discovery generated for us and you'll outlook at the notebook the very first time together with you.
So let's see what we have here. So somewhere of the problem good, it shares that what we analyzed also good it collected some advantages, disadvantages of containers for the server's architecture. OK, important. Nice looked at the cost model generated some core OK, this is a really nice one. So looking at the percentage of duty cycle like how often the tools are used, we will see where the break even point will happen. And you know my manager financial like this kind of data, let's see resource transaction trade-offs.
OK, so now there's a flippers utilization we see with difference between dedicated container serverless and also how this can vary potentially based on the hour of the day. OK. That's important. Then here it's basically compares now the calls start latency. So we're going if we're going to spend less money on the running infrastructure is probably going to cost us more in performance right
If the card is if the service is not ready when we want to do the tool call. So actually compares the one container versus the serverless costar which is larger.
Then there is kind of some sweet spot which is a little bit slower, but kind of probably is a good, good thing to do given the saving cost. And we ended up closing loop here with saying again, like, OK, let's see here. So hours of hours of the day utilization and the difference between our, if we use telemetry to feed it back to Azure and it will be more efficient because we can predict when will be demanded. We can kind of have the our infrastructure ready for that. And the overall recommendation is the hybrid execution model.
And when I run this several times, this cover always came up with this insights, but the graph the diesel generated were slightly different from one to another. All right, this is pretty cool, right? This is kind of the details that we want as engineers to make a data-driven decision.
And because this is a jibber notebook, I can tweak it if I want to change something. I can also ask Discover to change it to the chat. But this is probably a little bit too much of the details to share with like less technical audience. Maybe that's why we also ask Discover to generate in the same prompt A1 pager executive summary. So here it is and it showed the summary of recommendation, extracted some key data points and then pull the main chart of on the cost saving and say why the hybrid proposed approach is the best, right? So it's nice I can now share it with anybody on the team. So this is already pretty good, but I will last discover to do one more thing.
So I'm going to let's go back here, open the chat again and ask. OK, stop the current execution, keep the result and as discoverer to do one more thing this question. So question and answer is pretty nice. But if we really really want to push frontier of R&D forward, this simple question and answer, even if it is really good answer, that's not enough to really push frontier of R&D. We need to fully automate this scientific discovery loop reasoning, hypothesis experimentation, feeding to more reasoning or hypothesis experimentation just kind of continuing. And that's exactly why we built discovery engine and will show you, I will show you how it works. So here we're asking discovery. Let's create an agent and task flow that can iterate on your recommendation using a scientific method investigation loop. The agent should come up with a new observation and hypothesis and Azure summary continue, right? So let's look at the agents now.
We didn't talk about them yet. Discovery comes with two prebuilt agents. You can click this edit button to see what's inside. It has name, description tools that the agent can use, as well as a pretty detailed instruction as a markdown. All is actually markdown.
And this form is fully compatible with GitHub compiler agents. And then you can create the agents manually. You can edit them manually or you cannot discover to create them for you like we just did. Another powerful concept is tasks. So instead of asking one question at a time here, we can create one but a multiple tasks and assign them to agents. So agents can do this work in parallel. So I'll show you how that looks like. So let's say demo task, there's a name TPD description for now. So here's a task just created has some basic things like status time description.
What is task is supposed to do different states they can position to dependencies. So we have the trees of task comments where humans and more often agents will add their thinking about the reasoning about the task. And the most important part is that we can assign this task to an agent, right? We can do it manually or we can actually have Discovery assigned it automatically for us, right? So this is how the Discover engine runs.
So it looks at the all task that needs to be executed, then it looks at all available agents and does this matching. Agents pick up the task, it doesn't work and work. The tooling if necessary, gets back the results and adds them to the Commons. And then if the agent cannot answer the task completely, it can create new tasks for itself or some other agents like delegation, subtasking. Then the discovery engine monitors the task, this new task and it will be looking at the results. It will also be looking at the core model confidence course.
It will decide if this direction of the research of exploration is not promising, it will abandoned the task. And if the other direction of exploration and the research is promising, it will actually set assigning, continue assigning task to the agents. And this is really powerful because this whole loop can run automatically for day hours, sometimes even days and get us really, really deep insights. So let's, let's see here. Yeah. So Discovery now is still working on creating this task for us.
It may take a moment to complete. I will show you here how that looks like when it is already created. So like here we can look at the task that Discovery can create with a with a description assign it to the agent
and yeah and then the new agent that it created specific to our question that was asked. Right. So let's go back here.
All right. Yeah, now, now I'll actually discover it. And the question was asked why we was able to create the task and the agent assigned things. So this whole process will take some time to complete.
So we're not going to wait for it live. And instead, we'll jump ahead to some results of running similar discovery process and other domains like chemistry and material science. Before we do that, I want to briefly summarize what we saw in this live demo.
In about 15 minutes we gained deep insights about containers and serverless architectures were related to a workflows discovery was able to analyze hundreds scientific papers extracted deep insights from that wrote a Jupiter notebook for us with a lot of technical details.
Actually, it was able to create also the executive summary 1 pager and it was able to start the next execution cycle for this continuous discovery loop. All this power is available for you today. I cannot wait to see what you will discover next. So thank you guys and back to you, John. Now, can you pull up the HTML reports we've got here?
Yeah, we're going to get them right there. Yeah. So as Victor said, you know, you've seen, it's real, it's live, it works. That discovery engine, this is the cognitive layer that we've built that we can use to drive actual customer outcomes. I'm going to show you what a couple of those look like if we could actually. Yeah, stay on this one right here. The first thing I'm going to show you actually is that discovery action, that discovery engine in action.
What does that look like? When you've got sets of agents, You've got an agent that starts. If we're going to follow the scientific process, you're going to follow different pathways.
Try different hypothesis. I need to speed this up to 200 X just to show you really what that looks like as it was solving a scientific research problem. It's creating new agents
following new paths getting to different outcomes until ultimately it can come back and say that I've gathered all the information I need to meet my own internal OK Rs guidelines and I've closed out that task that I'm working on. So how do we use this? One of our customers, Science Co, who've been working with during private preview worked with us to solve one of their own problems. Now the interesting thing about Science, we think about R&D from knowledge to outcomes.
We actually think about starting left, what happens when you actually need to understand where to do your R&D and that starts with business. So we worked with them to develop a set of business agents that we added. It's just another set of agents to add to that discovery engine to do the work of saying where should I invest my R&D dollars? And this is the answer that they got back.
Heat transfer fluids for semiconductors. In a world of explosion of data centers, that makes a lot of sense. And they've got all of the data right here that we can look and see, you know, give us the outcomes of what makes sense for them.
Look at the other possibilities that they could have looked into. That's great. So they say that I should invest in heat transfer fluids. Now I need to understand how I actually go about building that product. So just like Victor asked a research question informed by the bookshelf, they do that, but informed by all their own proprietary data along with all of the relevant knowledge from this area. And we say, OK, great.
If I want to develop a new heat transfer fluid, here's the most important properties for me. Here are the things that matter. I can look at those top properties. I can look at all the properties, all of the rest of the information, this detailed matrix of what to do. But knowledge is just the beginning.
It's not enough to be informed about you what what you want to do. You need a system that can really execute. And that is what we do next then is we then have these agents actually drive the full research process for us. This can take weeks, even months, but it vastly accelerates the time to outcome for all of these customers. Now for them.
Here we can see that we actually identified 4 new candidates for heat transfer fluids with Science Co and we can scroll through here and see that actually we've saved the full computational plan so you can look and see the golden path that we took to get there. Reproducibility very important for the world of science. I can Scroll down through a lot of detail here. You know this is great. I love seeing these kind of charts that show that we're actually following a smart scientific process.
We're doing multi parameter optimization, not just brute force dumb optimizing for one single property. You need to actually get to a real outcome that you can have faith in here. And I think one other interesting thing I love showing off down here is when we get to the end
you know it even tells us suggested next steps both in silico that we continue to do on the discovery platform or then transitioning to the actual wet lab. So really great capabilities of what we can do for customers. Now if we can switch back to the other screen here on the laptop. This is not just Science Co. We've got a whole fleet of customers we've been working with and looking forward to even more here as we go out to general availability.
If you go search the web after build today we've got a lot of great blogs and press releases from some of our customers like BHP Cambridge Consultants
Causally in Silico Trials and many others that you see up here. With that, we thank you for spending time with us today. If you're interested in enterprise solutions that take advantage of the power of Azure, you can learn more at AKA Miss Microsoft Discovery docs. And if you want to try out the local app, you can find it at our Discovery GitHub repo. And as you've likely seen in other sessions, we'd love your feedback if you're willing to fill out a quick survey. And thank you very much for spending time with us. Thank.
You.
END
